Transforming mental  health for all

Transforming mental  health for all World mental health report

World mental health report: transforming mental health for all ISBN [PHONE_REDACTED]electronic version)  ISBN [PHONE_REDACTED]print version) © World Health Organization 2022 Some rights reserved. This work is available under the Creative Commons  Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO licence (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO;   https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/igo).  Under the terms of this licence, you may copy, redistribute and adapt the work for  non-commercial purposes, provided the work is appropriately cited, as indicated below.  In any use of this work, there should be no suggestion that WHO endorses any specific  organization, products or services. The use of the WHO logo is not permitted. If you  adapt the work, then you must license your work under the same or equivalent Creative  Commons licence. If you create a translation of this work, you should add the following  disclaimer along with the suggested citation: “This translation was not created by the  World Health Organization (WHO). WHO is not responsible for the content or accuracy of  this translation. The original English edition shall be the binding and authentic edition”.  Any mediation relating to disputes arising under the licence shall be conducted in  accordance with the mediation rules of the World Intellectual Property Organization  (http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/mediation/rules/). Suggested citation. World mental health report: transforming mental health for all.  Geneva: World Health Organization; 2022. Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO. Cataloguing-in-Publication (CIP) data. CIP data are available at http://apps.who.int/iris. Sales, rights and licensing. To purchase WHO publications, see http://apps.who.int/ bookorders. To submit requests for commercial use and queries on rights and licensing,  see https://www.who.int/copyright.  Third-party materials. If you wish to reuse material from this work that is attributed to a  third party, such as tables, figures or images, it is your responsibility to determine whether  permission is needed for that reuse and to obtain permission from the copyright holder.  The risk of claims resulting from infringement of any third-party-owned component in the  work rests solely with the user. General disclaimers. The designations employed and the presentation of the material  in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of  WHO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities,  or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted and dashed lines on  maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full agreement. The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply  that they are endorsed or recommended by WHO in preference to others of a similar  nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary  products are distinguished by initial capital letters. All reasonable precautions have been taken by WHO to verify the information  contained in this publication. However, the published material is being distributed  without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the  interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader. In no event shall WHO be  liable for damages arising from its use.  Graphic design and layout. Café.art.br and Ara Johannes.

Contents     Foreword Preface Acknowledgements List of abbreviations Executive summary 1. Introduction 1.1 Twenty years on 1.2 Time for change 1.3 About this report	 2. Principles and drivers in public  mental health 2.1 Concepts in mental health 2.2 Determinants of mental health 2.3 Global threats to mental health In focus: COVID-19 and mental health vi vii viii x xi [PHONE_REDACTED]iii

3. World mental health today 3.1 Epidemiological overview 3.2 Economic consequences 3.3 Gaps in public mental health 3.4 Barriers to demand for care 4. Benefits of change 4.1 Advancing public health 4.2 Promoting and protecting human rights In focus: Engaging and empowering people with lived experience 4.3 Enabling social and economic development 5. Foundations for change 5.1 Frameworks for policy and practice 5.2 Understanding and commitment In focus: Harnessing digital technologies for mental health 5.3 Financing for mental health 5.4 Competencies and human resources [PHONE_REDACTED]iv

6. Promotion and prevention for change 6.1 Mental health promotion and universal prevention 6.2 Selective and indicated prevention In focus: Enabling multisectoral promotion and prevention:  what role for the health sector? 6.3 Selected priorities for action 7. Restructuring and scaling up care  for impact 7.1 Understanding community-based mental health care 7.2 Mental health integrated in health services 7.3 Community mental health services 7.4 Mental health services beyond the health sector 8. Conclusion 8.1 Comprehensive action 8.2 Paths to transformation 8.3 Combining efforts for change [PHONE_REDACTED]v

Foreword As the world comes to live with, and learn  from, the far-reaching effects of the COVID-19  pandemic, we must all reflect on one of its most  striking aspects – the huge toll it has taken on  people’s mental health. Rates of already-common  conditions such as depression and anxiety  went up by more than 25% in the first year of  the pandemic, adding to the nearly one billion  people who were already living with a mental  disorder. At the same time, we must recognize the  frailty of health systems attempting to address  the needs of people with newly-presenting as  well as pre-existing mental health conditions. Mental health is a lot more than the absence of  illness: it is an intrinsic part of our individual and  collective health and well-being. As this report  shows, to achieve the global objectives set out in  the WHO Comprehensive mental health action plan  2013–2030 and the Sustainable Development Goals,  we need to transform our attitudes, actions and  approaches to promote and protect mental health,  and to provide and care for those in need. We  can and should do this by transforming the environments that influence our mental health and  by developing community-based mental health  services capable of achieving universal health  coverage for mental health. As part of these efforts,  we must intensify our collaborative action to  integrate mental health into primary health care.  In so doing, we will reduce suffering, preserve  people’s dignity and advance the development  of our communities and societies. Our vision is a  world where mental health is valued, promoted  and protected; where mental health conditions are  prevented; where anyone can exercise their human  rights and access affordable, quality mental health  care; and where everyone can participate fully  in society free from stigma and discrimination.  To achieve this ambitious transformation, a  concerted and renewed effort is needed in all  countries, whether they are rich or poor, stable  or fragile, affected by emergencies or not. WHO  will play its part as the lead agency for global  health and will continue to work nationally and  internationally to provide strategic leadership,  evidence, tools and technical support. Ultimately, there is no health  without mental health. Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus Director-General  World Health Organization vi

Preface Mental health conditions are very common in  all countries of the world. Most societies and  most health and social systems neglect mental  health and do not provide the care and support  people need and deserve. The result is that  millions of people around the world suffer in  silence, experience human rights violations or  are negatively affected in their daily lives.  This should not be the story of mental health,  globally or in your country. And it does not have  to be. This report argues for a transformation  in mental health and shows that it is possible.  Using findings from research and practice, it  explores diverse options to deepen the value and  commitment we give to mental health, to reshape  environments that influence mental health, and  to develop and strengthen community-based  mental health services. Using examples of positive  change from across the globe, this report shows  that every country, no matter its situation, has  many opportunities to significantly improve  mental health for its adults and children.  Throughout this report you will find narratives  from people around the world with lived  experience of mental health conditions. Their  accounts show what effective health and  social support looks like, how it can lead to  recovery, and how this means different things to  different people. And they tell of the suffering,  stigma and social exclusion that happens in  the absence of environments and services that  protect and support mental health and that  offer affordable, quality care. Ultimately, these  stories are a reminder that investing in and  transforming mental health means investing in  people. Everyone has a right to mental health.  Everyone deserves the chance to thrive. Dévora Kestel Director Department of Mental Health and Substance Use World Health Organization vii

Acknowledgements Leadership This report was developed under the overall  direction of Dévora Kestel, with coordination  by Mark van Ommeren, of the Department  of Mental Health and Substance Use of  the World Health Organization (WHO). Writing and editorial team Sian Lewis (London, United Kingdom of  Great Britain and Northern Ireland), Melvyn  Freeman (Johannesburg, South Africa), Mark  van Ommeren (WHO), Dan Chisholm (WHO),  Olivia Gascoigne Siegl (Birmingham, United  Kingdom) and Dévora Kestel (WHO). WHO contributors and reviewers WHO Headquarters staff and consultants:  Aemal Akhtar, Elaine Brohan, Alison Brunier,  Ken Carswell, Rodrigo Cataldi, Mateo Cesari,  Venkatraman Chandra-Mouli, Sudipto Chatterjee,  Neerja Chowdhary, Natalie Drew, Tarun Dua,  Batool Fatima, Alexandra Fleischmann, Stéfanie  Fréel, Michelle Funk, Claudia Garcia-Moreno,  Brandon Gray, Fahmy Hanna, Thiago Herick  De Sa, Jang Hyobum, Kavitha Kolappa, Aiysha  Malik, John Mahoney, Gergana Manolova,  Vladimir Poznyak, Geoffrey Reed, Nathalie  Roebbel, Alison Schafer, Nicoline Schiess,  Katrin Seeher, Chiara Servili, Yuka Sumi,  Maike van Niekerk and Inka Weissbecker.  WHO staff in regions and countries: Florence  Baingana (WHO Regional Office for Africa),  Catarina Dahl (WHO Country Office for Brazil),  Chencho Dorji (WHO Regional Office for  South-East Asia), Jennifer Hall (WHO Country  Office for Fiji), Matías Irarrázaval (WHO Regional  Office for the Americas), Ledia Lazeri (WHO  Regional Office for Europe), Renato Oliveira e  Souza (WHO Regional Office for the Americas),  Khalid Saeed (WHO Regional Office for the  Eastern Mediterranean) and Martin Vandendyck  (WHO Regional Office for the Western Pacific). External contributors and reviewers Advisory group: Fatma Charfi (University of  Tunis El Manar, Tunis, Tunisia); Fiona Charlson  (University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia);  Pim Cuijpers (Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam,  Amsterdam Netherlands); Terdsak Detkong  (Ministry of Public Health, Bangkok, Thailand);  Julian Eaton (CBM and London School of Hygiene  and Tropical Medicine, United Kingdom); Daniel  Fung (International Association for Child and  Adolescent Psychiatry and Allied Professions,  Singapore); Grace Gatera (Kigali, Rwanda); Cecilia  Guillén (En Primera Persona AC, Mexico City,  Mexico); Saima Hossain (Shuchona Foundation,  Dhaka, Bangladesh); Asma Humayun (Islamabad,  Pakistan); Anne Lovell (French Institute of Health  and Medical Research (INSERM), Paris, France);  Nasser Loza (World Federation for Mental  Health, Cairo, Egypt); Nino Makhashvili (Ilia State  University, Tiblisi, Georgia); Roberto Mezzina  (International Mental Health Collaborating  Network, Trieste, Italy); Christian Montenegro  (University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom);  Vikram Patel (Harvard Medical School, Boston,  United States of America (USA)); Soumitra  Pathare (Indian Law Society, Pune, India) and  Ashwin Vasan (Fountain House, New York, USA). Contributors of lived experience narratives:   Marie Abanga (Cameroon), Esenam Abra Drah  (Ghana), Amira Ali Al-Jamal (Jordan), Benjamin  Ballah (Liberia), Nour Awad (Lebanon), Dixoni  Emmanuel (United Republic of Tanzania), Sandra  Ferreira (South Africa), Regina Célia Freire da Silva  (Brazil), Odireleng Kasale (Botswana), Steven Lawlor  (United Kingdom), Enoch Li (China), Tamira Loewen  (Canada), Joanna Lovón (Peru), Kat McIntosh  viii

(Trinidad and Tobago), Lion Gai Meir (Israel),  Eleni Misganaw (Ethiopia), Angelica Mkorongo  (Zimbabwe), Mrs BN (Anonymous), Ntokozo  Nyathi (Zimbabwe), Benny Prawira (Indonesia),  Alejandra Rivera (Peru), Claudia Sartor (South  Africa), Alexandra Schuster (United Kingdom),  Olivia Gascoigne Siegl (United Kingdom), Charlene  Sunkel (South Africa), Anders Timms (United  Kingdom), Laura Van Tosh (USA), Sahar Vasquez  (Belize), Larry White (Canada) and Zineb (Morocco). Other contributors and peer reviewers: Alastair  Ager (Queen Margaret University, Edinburgh,  United Kingdom); Esra Alataş (Ministry of Health,  Ankara, Türkiye); Benjamin Ballah (Cultivation for  Users’ Hope, Congo Town, Liberia); Corrado Barbui  (University of Verona, Italy); Jonathan Campion  (South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation  Trust, London, United Kingdom); Odille Chang (Fiji  National University, Suva, Fiji); Leonardo Cubillos  (National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda,  USA); Michael Eddleston (University of Edinburgh,  United Kingdom); Emma Ferguson (United Nations  Children’s Fund (UNICEF), New York, USA); Alize  Ferrari (University of Queensland, Brisbane,  Australia); Kostas Fountoulakis (Aristotle University  of Thessaloniki, Greece); Charlotte Hanlon (King’s  College London, United Kingdom and University of  Addis Ababa, Ethiopia); Helen Herrman (University  of Melbourne, Australia); Zeinab Hijazi (UNICEF,  New York, USA); Priscilla Idele (UN Executive Office  of the Secretary-General, New York, USA); Lynne  Jones (London School of Hygiene and Tropical  Medicine, United Kingdom); René Keet (GGZ  Noord-Holland-Noord, Alkmaar, the Netherlands);  Christian Kieling (Federal University of Rio  Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil); Sarah Kline  (United for Global Mental Health, London, United  Kingdom); Brandon Kohrt (George Washington  University, Washington, DC, USA); Sherianne  Kramer (Amsterdam University College, the  Netherlands); Joanna Lai (UNICEF, New York,  USA); Patricia Landinez (UNICEF, New York,   USA); Crick Lund (King’s College London, United  Kingdom and University of Cape Town, South  Africa); Mario Maj (University of Campania Luigi  Vanvitelli, Napoli, Italy); Ana Maria Mantilla Herrera  (University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia);  Simon Njuguna Kahonge (Ministry of Health,  Nairobi, Kenya); Joseph Quoi (Ministry of Health,  Monrovia, Liberia); Sarah Ramsay (Cambridge,  United Kingdom); James Sale (United for Global  Mental Health, London, United Kingdom);  Damian Santomauro (University of Queensland,  Brisbane, Australia); Palmira Fortunato dos  Santos (Ministry of Health, Maputo, Mozambique);  Benedetto Saraceno (NOVA University Lisbon,  Portugal); Norman Sartorius (Association for the  Improvement of Mental Health Programmes,  Geneva, Switzerland); Shekhar Saxena (Harvard  T H Chan School of Public Health, Boston, USA);  Jamileh Shadid (University of Queensland,  Brisbane, Australia); Beck Smith (Wellcome Trust,  London, United Kingdom); Charlene Sunkel  (Global Mental Health Peer Network, Johannesburg, South Africa); Angie Tarr (Ministry of  Health, Monrovia, Liberia); Graham Thornicroft  (King’s College London, United Kingdom); Wietse  Tol (University of Copenhagen, Denmark); Peter  Ventevogel (United Nations High Commissioner  for Refugees, Geneva, Switzerland); Harvey  Whiteford (University of Queensland, Brisbane,  Australia); Miranda Wolpert (Wellcome Trust,  London, United Kingdom); and Cynthia Zavala  (University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia).    Financial support Swiss Agency for Development and  Cooperation, Norwegian Agency for  Development Cooperation, and United States  Agency for International Development. ix

List of abbreviations ADHD	 attention deficit hyperactivity disorder  CAMHS	 child and adolescent mental health services  CBT	 cognitive behavioural therapy  COVID-19	 coronavirus disease 2019 CRC	 Convention on the Rights of the Child CRPD	 Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities  DALY	 disability-adjusted life year EQUIP	 Ensuring Quality in Psychological Support  IASC	 Inter-Agency Standing Committee  ICD-11	 International Classification of Diseases 11th Revision  ILO	 International Labour Organization IPT	 interpersonal psychotherapy / interpersonal therapy  GBD	 Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries and Risk Factors study  GHE	 WHO Global Health Estimates  GMHPN	 Global Mental Health Peer Network  HAT	 Helping Adolescents Thrive LMIC	 low- and middle-income country mhGAP	 Mental Health Gap Action Programme  mhGAP-IG	 mhGAP Intervention Guide MHPSS	 mental health and psychosocial support  NCD	 noncommunicable disease NTD	 neglected tropical disease OCD	 obsessive–compulsive disorder PAHO	 Pan American Health Organization  PM+	 problem management plus PTSD	 post-traumatic stress disorder SDG	 Sustainable Development Goal  TB	 tuberculosis UHC	 universal health coverage UNICEF	 United Nations Children’s Fund VCPH	 Virtual Campus for Public Health WHO	 World Health Organization YLL	 years of life lost to premature mortality YLD	 years of healthy life lost to disability x

Executive  summary

INTRODUCTION: A WORLD REPORT 1 Inspire and inform change Deepen value and commitment Strengthen mental health care Reshape environments PATHS TO  TRANSFORMATION 8 PRINCIPLES AND  DRIVERS OF PUBLIC  MENTAL HEALTH THE CASE FOR  TRANSFORMATION:  WHAT ARE THE  BENEFITS OF CHANGE? THE FOUNDATIONS: HOW DO WE BUILD AMBITION AND ACTION FOR CHANGE? MENTAL HEALTH REFORM: HOW DO WE RESTRUCTURE SERVICES FOR CHANGE? Promote mental health for all  Protect those at risk Provide mental health care in the community  Core concepts Determinants Suicide prevention Children and  adolescents Mental health  at work Community  services In general health care Beyond the  health sector Laws, plans and policies Research and  information  Domestic  finance External  investment  Political will Public interest Community  action  Health care  workforce Community  providers Self-care MENTAL HEALTH TODAY: WHY DO  WE NEED A TRANSFORMATION IN  MENTAL HEALTH?  Advance  public health Protect  human rights Support  development A growing crisis [PHONE_REDACTED]AND7 Scale up care for common  conditions Deinstitutionalize  care for severe  conditions Overview of the World mental health report: transforming mental health for all World mental health report: transforming mental health for all xii

Chapter 1. Introduction  A world report to inspire   and inform change.  Twenty years after WHO published its landmark  The world health report 2001: mental health  – new understanding, new hope, the recommendations made then remain valid today.  Yet many advances have been made. Interest  in and understanding of mental health has  increased. Many countries have established,  updated and strengthened mental health policies  or plans. Advocacy movements have amplified  the voices of people with lived experience  of mental health conditions. Informed by  research, the field has advanced technically.  Numerous practical, evidence-based mental  health guidelines, manuals and other tools  are now available for implementation. WHO Member States adopted the Comprehensive  mental health action plan 2013–2030. They  committed to meet global targets for improved  mental health. These were focused on  strengthening leadership and governance,  community-based care, promotion and  prevention, and information systems and research. But WHO’s latest analysis of country performance  against the action plan shows that progress has  been slow. For most of the world, the approach to  mental health care remains very much business  as usual. The result? Mental health conditions  continue to exact a heavy toll on people’s lives,  while mental health systems and services  remain ill-equipped to meet people’s needs. In the meantime, global threats to mental  health are ever present. Growing social and  economic inequalities, protracted conflicts,  violence and public health emergencies  threaten progress towards improved  well-being. Now, more than ever, business as  usual for mental health simply will not do.  This report is designed to inspire and inform the  indisputable and urgent transformation required  to ensure better mental health for all. While  promoting a multisectoral approach, this report is  especially written for decision-makers in the health  sector. This includes ministries of health and other  partners in the health sector who are generally  tasked with developing mental health policy and  delivering mental health systems and services. Business as usual for mental  health simply will not do. xiii Executive summary

Chapter 2. Principles and drivers in public mental health Mental health is critically important   for everyone, everywhere.  Mental health is an integral part of our general  health and well-being and a basic human  right. Having good mental health means we  are better able to connect, function, cope  and thrive. Mental health exists on a complex  continuum, with experiences ranging from an  optimal state of well-being to debilitating states  of great suffering and emotional pain. People  with mental health conditions are more likely  to experience lower levels of mental well-being,  but this is not always or necessarily the case.  At any one time, a diverse set of individual,  family, community and structural factors may  combine to protect or undermine our mental  health and shift our position on the mental  health continuum. Although most people are  remarkably resilient, people who are exposed to  unfavourable circumstances – including poverty,  violence and inequality – are at higher risk of  experiencing mental health conditions. Risks  can manifest themselves at all stages of life,  but those that occur during developmentally  sensitive periods, especially early childhood,  are particularly detrimental. Protective factors  similarly occur throughout our lives and serve to  strengthen resilience. They include our individual  social and emotional skills and attributes as  well as positive social interactions, quality  education, decent work, safe neighbourhoods  and community cohesion, among others. Because the factors determining mental health  are multisectoral, interventions to promote and  protect mental health should also be delivered  across multiple sectors. And when it comes  to providing care, a multisectoral approach is  similarly needed because people with mental  health conditions often require services and  support that extend beyond clinical treatment. Mental health risks and protective factors can  be found in society at different scales. Local  threats heighten risk for individuals, families  and communities. Global threats heighten risk  for whole populations and can slow worldwide  progress towards improved well-being. In this  context, key threats today include: economic  downturns and social polarization; public  health emergencies; widespread humanitarian emergencies and forced displacement; and the growing climate crisis.  Among its many impacts, the COVID-19 pandemic  has created a global crisis for mental health,  fuelling short- and long-term stresses and  undermining the mental health of millions.  For example, estimates put the rise in both  anxiety and depressive disorders at more than  25% during the first year of the pandemic. At  the same time, mental health services have  been severely disrupted and the treatment gap  for mental health conditions has widened. Mental health is an integral part of  our general health and well-being  and a basic human right. World mental health report: transforming mental health for all xiv

Chapter 3. World mental health today Mental health needs are high but responses  are insufficient and inadequate. In all countries, mental health conditions are  highly prevalent. About one in eight people in the  world live with a mental disorder. The prevalence  of different mental disorders varies with sex and  age. In both males and females, anxiety disorders  and depressive disorders are the most common.  Suicide affects people and their families from  all countries and contexts, and at all ages.  Globally, there may be 20 suicide attempts  to every one death, and yet suicide accounts  for more than one in every 100 deaths. It is a  major cause of death among young people.  Mental disorders are the leading cause of years  lived with disability (YLDs), accounting for  one in every six YLDs globally. Schizophrenia,  which occurs in approximately 1 in 200 adults,  is a primary concern: in its acute states it is  the most impairing of all health conditions.  People with schizophrenia or other severe  mental health conditions die on average 10 to  20 years earlier than the general population,  often of preventable physical diseases. Overall, the economic consequences of mental  health conditions are enormous. Productivity losses and other indirect costs to society  often far outstrip health care costs. Economically, schizophrenia is the most costly mental  disorder per person to society. Depressive  and anxiety disorders are much less costly per  person; but they are more prevalent, and so  majorly contribute to overall national costs.  In addition to being pervasive and costly, mental  health conditions are also severely underserved.  Mental health systems all over the world are  marked by major gaps and imbalances in  information and research, governance, resources  and services. Other health conditions are often  prioritized over mental health, and within mental  health budgets, community-based mental health  care is consistently underfunded. On average,  countries dedicate less than 2% of their health  care budgets to mental health. More than 70%  of mental health expenditure in middle-income  countries still goes towards psychiatric hospitals.  Around half the world’s population lives in  countries where there is just one psychiatrist  to serve [PHONE_REDACTED]or more people. And the availability of affordable essential psychotropic  medicines is limited, especially in low-income  countries. Most people with diagnosed mental  health conditions go completely untreated.  In all countries, gaps in service coverage are  compounded by variability in quality of care.  Several factors stop people from seeking help for  mental health conditions, including poor quality  of services, low levels of health literacy in mental  health, and stigma and discrimination. In many  places, formal mental health services do not exist.  Even when they are available, they are often inaccessible or unaffordable. People will often choose  to suffer mental distress without relief rather than  risk the discrimination and ostracization that  comes with accessing mental health services. xv Executive summary

Chapter 4. Benefits of change Committing to mental health is an  investment towards a better life and  future for all.  There are three main reasons to invest in  mental health: public health, human rights  and socioeconomic development. Investing in mental health for all advances  public health. It can greatly reduce suffering and  improve the health, quality of life, functioning  and life expectancy of people with mental  health conditions. Enhanced coverage and  increased financial protection are fundamental  steps towards closing the vast care gap and  reducing inequities in mental health. To that  end, including mental health in universal health  coverage packages of essential services is vital.  So too is integrating mental and physical health  care, which improves accessibility, reduces  fragmentation and duplication of resources  and better meets people’s health needs. Investing in mental health is needed to stop  human rights violations. Around the world, people  with mental health conditions are frequently  excluded from community life and denied basic  rights. For example, they are not only discriminated against in employment, education and  housing, but also do not enjoy equal recognition  before the law. And too often they are subjected  to human rights abuses by some of the very  health services responsible for their care. By  implementing internationally agreed human rights  conventions, such as the Convention for the Rights  of People with Disabilities, major advances can be  made in human rights. Anti-stigma interventions  – particularly social contact strategies through  which people with lived experience help to  shift attitudes and actions – can also reduce  stigma and discrimination in the community. Investing in mental health can enable social and  economic development. Poor mental health  puts a brake on development by reducing  productivity, straining social relationships and  compounding cycles of poverty and disadvantage.  Conversely, when people are mentally healthy  and live in supportive environments, they  can learn and work well and contribute to  their communities, to the benefit of all. Accumulated evidence shows that there is  a core set of cost–effective interventions  for priority conditions that are feasible,  affordable and appropriate. These include  school-based social and emotional learning  programmes and regulatory bans on highly  hazardous pesticides (to prevent suicides),  as well as a range of clinical interventions  as listed in the WHO UHC Compendium.  Scaling up treatment  for depression and  anxiety provides a   benefit–cost  ratio of 5 to 1 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all xvi

Chapter 5. Foundations for change Transforming mental health starts with  building the foundations for well-functioning  mental health systems and services.  In many ways, health system strengthening provides the foundations for change  in mental health. It enables reorganization  and scaling up of services and support. Key  areas for action include: governance and  leadership; finance; public awareness; and  competencies for mental health care. Global and national frameworks are critical to  guide action on mental health and provide an  enabling context for transformation. Legislation  that complies with international human  rights instruments is needed to protect and  promote human rights. Given that the causes  and needs of mental health cross sectors, it  is essential that laws and policies aimed at  improved mental health address all sectors. Three types of political commitment – expressed,  institutional and budgetary – are needed to drive  the mental health agenda forward. Advocacy,  evidence and political context can be hugely  influential in fostering commitment and leadership.  Humanitarian and public health emergencies in  particular represent an obligation and opportunity  for countries to invest in mental health. They  offer unparalleled platforms for change. Strong  public interest and understanding also drive  improvement. People with lived experience are  important agents of change to improve public  awareness of mental health and acceptance  of people with mental health conditions. To transform mental health services, commitment  must be translated into action through appropriate  financing. In practice, this means policy-makers  and planners need to devote more funds to  mental health. This is achieved either by getting  additional resources from the state treasury or  external funders, or by redistributing resources  towards mental health, both within the health  budget as well as across government. A competent and motivated workforce is a vital  component of a well-functioning health system.  All countries need to expand their specialized  workforce for mental health, while simultaneously building mental health care competencies of other care providers and individuals. In  particular, primary care staff and a wide range  of community providers – including community  workers and peers – need to be equipped with  new skills to detect mental health conditions,  provide basic interventions and support, refer  people where necessary, and follow-up. Beyond the mental health workforce, each of us can  strengthen our individual skills and competencies  in understanding and looking after our own  mental health. Everyone in the community and  the care system needs to support social inclusion  for people living with mental health conditions,  and to promote rights-based, person-centred,  recovery-oriented care and support. In many settings, digital technologies offer  promising tools, and can strengthen mental health  systems by providing ways to inform and educate  the public, train and support health care workers,  deliver remote care, and enable self-help. xvii Executive summary

Chapter 6. Promotion and prevention for change Transforming mental health means  strengthening multisectoral promotion   and prevention for all. At all stages of life, promotion and prevention  are required to enhance mental well-being  and resilience, prevent the onset and  impact of mental health conditions, and  drive down the need for mental health care.  There is increasing evidence that promotion  and prevention can be cost–effective. Promotion and prevention interventions  work by identifying the individual, social and  structural determinants of mental health, and  then intervening to reduce risks, build resilience  and establish supportive environments for  mental health. Interventions can be designed for  individuals, specific groups or whole populations. Reshaping the determinants of mental health often  requires action beyond the health sector, which  makes effective promotion and prevention a multisectoral venture. The health sector can contribute  significantly by embedding promotion and  prevention efforts within health services; and by  advocating, initiating and, where appropriate, facilitating multisectoral collaboration and coordination. Suicide prevention is an international priority, with a  Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) target to reduce  the suicide mortality rate by one third by 2030. To  help countries reach this target, WHO has developed  the LIVE LIFE approach to suicide prevention,  which prioritizes four interventions with proven  efficacy: limiting access to the means of suicide;  interacting with the media for responsible reporting  on suicide; fostering social and emotional life skills  in adolescents; and early intervention for anyone  affected by suicidal behaviours. Banning highly  hazardous pesticides is a particularly inexpensive  and cost–effective intervention. In countries  with a high burden of pesticide self-poisonings,  bans can lead to an immediate and clear drop in  overall suicide rates, without agricultural loss. Infancy, childhood and adolescence are ages of  both vulnerability and opportunity in mental  health. Nurturing, caregiving and supportive  learning environments can be hugely protective  of future mental health. On the other hand,  adverse childhood experiences increase the risk  of experiencing mental health conditions. Four  key strategies for reducing risks and boosting  protective factors include: developing and  enforcing policies and laws that promote and  protect mental health; supporting caregivers to  provide nurturing care; implementing school-based  programmes, including anti-bullying interventions; and improving the quality of environments  in communities and digital spaces. School-based  social and emotional learning programmes  are among the most effective promotion  strategies for countries at all income levels. Like schools, workplaces can be places of both  opportunity and risk for mental health. Employers  and governments have a responsibility to  create more work opportunities for people with  mental health conditions, and to promote and  protect all people’s mental health at work. For  governments, that means implementing supportive  legislation and regulations in human rights,  labour and occupational health. For employers,  WHO guidelines emphasize the importance of  organizational interventions, manager mental  health training and interventions for workers. World mental health report: transforming mental health for all xviii

Chapter 7. Restructuring and scaling up care for impact Transforming mental health means  strengthening community-based care   for all in need. At the heart of mental health reform lies a major  reorganization of mental health services. This  must shift the locus of care for severe mental  health conditions away from psychiatric hospitals  towards community-based mental health  services , closing long-stay psychiatric hospitals once there are adequate community alternatives.  At the same time, care for common conditions  such as depression and anxiety must be scaled up.  Both strategies are critical to improve coverage and  quality for mental health care. Community-based  mental health care is more accessible and  acceptable than institutional care and delivers  better outcomes for people with mental health  conditions. People-centred, recovery-oriented  and human rights-based care is essential. Community-based mental health care comprises a  network of interconnected services that includes:  mental health services integrated in general health  care; community mental health services; and services  that deliver mental health care in non-health settings  and support access to key social services. Social and  informal support delivered by community providers  (e.g. community workers, peers) complement formal  services and help ensure enabling environments for  people with mental health conditions. Overall, there  is no single model for organizing community-based  mental health services that applies to all country  contexts. Yet every country, no matter its resource  constraints, can take steps to restructure and  scale up mental health care for impact. Integrating mental health into general health  services typically involves task-sharing with  non-specialist health care providers or adding  dedicated mental health staff and resources to  primary and secondary health care. Task-sharing  with primary health care providers has been shown  to help reduce the treatment gap and increase  coverage for priority mental health conditions.  Task-sharing within disease-specific services  such as HIV/AIDS or TB programmes can improve  both physical and mental health outcomes. General hospitals and community mental health  centres or teams provide secondary mental  health care. They are often the cornerstone of  community-based networks of services. They  typically cater for a range of mental health conditions  in adults, adolescents and children and blend  clinical services with psychosocial rehabilitation  and activities to promote social inclusion and  participation in community life. Supported living  services offer a valuable alternative to institutional  care; and can include a mix of facilities with varying  levels of support for different levels of dependency. At all levels of health care, peer support services  provide an additional layer of support in which  people use their own experiences to help  each other – by sharing knowledge, providing  emotional support, creating opportunities for  social interaction, offering practical help or  engaging in advocacy and awareness raising. The responsibility for delivering community-based  mental health care straddles multiple sectors.  Complementing health interventions with key  social services, including child protection and  access to education, employment and social  protection, is essential to enable people with  mental health conditions achieve their recovery  goals and live a more satisfying and meaningful life. xix Executive summary

Chapter 8. Conclusion Deepen commitment, reshape  environments, and strengthen care   to transform mental health. This report argues for a worldwide transformation  towards better mental health for all. The WHO  Comprehensive mental health action plan  2013–2030 represents a commitment from all  countries to improve mental health and mental  health care and provides a blueprint for action. No  country is expected to fulfil every implementation  option in the global action plan. And many  countries do not have the resources to implement  every action described in this report. But every  country has ample opportunities to make  meaningful progress towards better mental health  for its population. Choosing what to focus on first  will depend on country contexts, local mental  health needs, other priorities and the existing  state and structure of each mental health system. The evidence, experience and expertise presented  in this report point to three key paths to transformation that can accelerate progress against  the global action plan. These focus on shifting  attitudes to mental health, addressing risks to  mental health in our environment and strengthening systems that care for mental health. First, we must deepen the value and commitment  we give to mental health as individuals,  communities and governments; and match that  value with more commitment, engagement and  investment by all stakeholders, across all sectors.  Second, we must reshape the physical, social  and economic characteristics of environments  – in homes, schools, workplaces and the wider  community – to better protect mental health  and prevent mental health conditions. These  environments need to give everyone an equal  opportunity to thrive and reach the highest  attainable level of mental health and well-being.  Third, we must strengthen mental health care so  that the full spectrum of mental health needs is met  through a community-based network of accessible,  affordable and quality services and support.  Each path to transformation is a path towards  better mental health for all. Together, they  will lead us closer to a world in which mental  health is valued, promoted and protected;  where everyone has an equal opportunity  to enjoy mental health and to exercise their  human rights; and where everyone can  access the mental health care they need. Individuals, governments, care providers,  nongovernmental organizations, academics,  employers, civil society and other stakeholders  all have a part to play. It will take the combined  efforts of us all to transform mental health.  World mental health report: transforming mental health for all xx

Introduction

Just over twenty years ago WHO published its  landmark World health report 2001 Mental health:  new understanding, new hope (1). Building on earlier  global reports and using insights from science,  epidemiology and real-world experience, the 2001  report shone a light on mental health’s critical  role in the well-being of individuals, communities  and countries. It laid bare the enormous public  health and socioeconomic impacts of mental  ill-health and exposed a huge gap between people’s  need for, and receipt of, care or treatment. The international health community had already  been advocating for mental health action for  decades (2). But the 2001 report marked a  watershed moment in global awareness of  mental health’s importance, the prevalence and  impact of mental health conditions, and the need  for a public health approach. Through its ten  recommendations, the report provided one of  the earliest and clearest global frameworks for  action on mental health. It called on countries  to: provide treatment in primary care; make  psychotropic medicines available; provide  care in the community; educate the public;  involve communities, families and consumers;  establish national policies, programmes  and legislation; develop human resources;  link with other sectors; monitor community  mental health; and support more research. 1.1 Twenty years on Twenty years later, all of these recommendations remain valid. Yet progress has been  made. In many countries political leaders,  professionals across sectors, and people  in the general population increasingly  recognize the importance of mental health. Since the 2001 report, countries around the  world have formally adopted international  frameworks that guide them to act for mental  health. Most notably, WHO Member States have  adopted the Comprehensive mental health  action  plan 2013–2030 committing them to meet ten  global targets for improved mental health (3).  These are structured around leadership and   governance, community-based care, promotion  and prevention, and information systems and  research (see Fig. 1.1). Historic conventions  and global goals, such as the Convention on  the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD),  the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)  and universal health coverage (UHC), have  given countries further critical impetus to  transform and improve mental health. Recommendations made in  2001 remain valid, yet there  has been progress. Since 2001, many countries have also established  their own national policies and programmes  on mental health. International research on  mental health is advancing, with relevant and  high-quality research continuously disseminated  through the world’s leading public health  journals. And mental health is also increasingly  integrated in public health training programmes. Advocacy movements that include, and may be  led by, people with lived experience have gained  much greater prominence over the past two  decades. This has helped many people to become  more knowledgeable and understanding of mental  health. Mental health issues and experiences are  now more frequently discussed and shared in  broadcast and social media, particularly following  the COVID-19 pandemic, and especially among  young people. Such coverage not only helps  destigmatize mental ill-health but also increases 2 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

FIG. 1.1  A visual summary of the Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030 GOALS OUTCOMES OBJECTIVES PRINCIPLES Universal  health  coverage Human rights Empowerment  of lived  experience Multisectoral  action Evidence-based  practice Life-course  approach LEADERSHIP AND GOVERNANCE COMMUNITYBASED SERVICES PROMOTION AND PREVENTION  INFORMATION, EVIDENCE AND RESEARCH   [PHONE_REDACTED]Promote  well-being Prevent  mental health  conditions Enhance  recovery Provide  care Updated, rights-based  policies, plans and laws  for mental health Service coverage for   mental health conditions Community-based mental  health facilities Primary health care  includes mental health Routine collection and  reporting of core mental  health indicators Worldwide research on  mental health Functioning national,  multisectoral promotion and  prevention programmes Much fewer suicides  worldwide Mental health and  psychosocial preparedness  for emergencies Reduce illness,  death and  disability Source: WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]. Chapter 1 Introduction 3

the value given to the voices, priorities and  expertise of people with lived experience.  International agencies are also increasingly  interested in mental health and have had  a key role in raising its profile as a relevant  issue, including through their flagship publications such as UNICEF’s 2021 State of the  world’s children report on mental health (4). Although in 2001 mental disorders were  already known to be common, much more  is known today about their epidemiology  including their early onset, high prevalence  and interacting determinants. Informed by  further research, the field has also advanced  technically. Task-sharing between specialist  and non-specialist mental health care providers  has been widely demonstrated to be effective,  including for psychological interventions,  and is now more frequently implemented.  The number of practical, evidence-based  mental health guidelines, manuals and  other tools has also vastly expanded.  The mental health needs of people affected  by conflicts, disasters and disease outbreaks  have become widely recognized, and mental  health is frequently, though not always,  addressed as part of crisis responses. 4 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

1.2 Time for change Despite this progress, for most countries  and communities, mental health conditions  continue to exact a heavy toll on people’s lives,  while mental health systems and services  remain ill-equipped to meet people’s needs. Nearly a billion people around the world live with  a diagnosable mental disorder. Most people with  mental health conditions do not have access to  effective care because services and supports are  not available, lack capacity, cannot be accessed or  are unaffordable; or because widespread stigma  stops people from seeking help. Different belief  systems, language and idiomatic expressions  around mental health across cultures influence  whether, how and where people seek help.  They also influence whether people recognize  problems or experiences – their own and those  of others – as concerning mental health. Financial and human resources for mental  health are still scarce in most countries and are  unevenly distributed. All over the world mental  health receives just a tiny fraction of health  budgets. In many countries most of these few  and wholly inadequate resources go straight  to psychiatric hospitals, which rarely provide  the care people need, and are often located  far from where most people live. As a result of  extreme underinvestment, universal mental  health coverage remains far out of reach. In  some countries, the treatment gap for severe  mental health conditions is a staggering 90%. Too many people living with mental  health conditions are not getting  the care they need and deserve. For people with mental health conditions that  are detected, the care and treatment they  get is all too often inadequate or improper.  Human rights violations continue to pervade  institutions and communities around the world,  including health services. Moreover, even  when services try to address mental health  conditions, most overlook affected people’s  physical health and wider social needs. Both the 2001 report and the Comprehensive  mental health action plan 2013–2030 emphasized  the need for accessible community-based  mental health services. These should adopt a  biopsychosocial approach to care and should  be developed and delivered in close collaboration with multiple sectors and stakeholders  to address the full range of needs that people  living with mental health conditions may have. But the global shift towards care in the  community has been very slow and truly  multisectoral initiatives remain few and far  between. The truth is that two decades after  the landmark 2001 report, and nearly a decade  after the world committed to the action plan,  the countries and communities that have seen  real innovation and advances remain islands  of good practice in a sea of need and neglect.  For most of the world, the approach to mental  health care remains very much business as usual.  And the result is that all over the world too many  people living with mental health conditions are  not getting the care they need and deserve.  The latest analysis by WHO’s Mental Health Atlas  of country performance against the action plan  confirms that progress has been slow (5). For  example, in [PHONE_REDACTED]% of countries reported  having mental health policies and plans that  were aligned with human rights instruments.  The action plan set a target to increase that  figure to 80% by 2020 (later this was extended to  Chapter 1 Introduction [PHONE_REDACTED]; but nearly halfway into the plan the figure  had only risen to 51% (5). Coverage for care of  psychosis worldwide is estimated to be as low  as 29%. Some areas have had more success: the  global age-standardized suicide mortality rate  for 2019 had dropped 10% since 2013. But this  is far short of the 33% reduction target for 2030.  Overall, there is still a long way to go before the  world meets the targets set out in the Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030. In the meantime, global threats to mental health  are ever present. Growing social and economic  inequalities, protracted conflicts and public health  emergencies affect whole populations, threatening  progress towards improved well-being. Most  recently, the COVID-19 pandemic has affected  the mental health and well-being of so many,  both with and without pre-existing conditions,  and has exacerbated social inequalities as  well as systemic weaknesses in services.  And while anyone at any time can be affected by  poor mental health, the risks are far from equal.  Globally, women and young people have borne  the brunt of the pandemic’s social and economic  fallout (6). Some people – such as prisoners,  forcibly displaced people, residents in long-term  care homes and survivors of domestic violence –  tend to be particularly vulnerable as pre-existing  failures in human rights, legal or social protection  may have worsened during the pandemic (7).  New demands for mental health care are adding  to the strain on already overstretched health  systems everywhere and are interacting with  inequalities in ways that put mental health  care out of reach for those who need it most. Now, more than ever, business as usual for  mental health care simply will not do. The need  for wide-ranging transformation towards mental  health for all is indisputable and urgent. Countries everywhere need to step up  their commitment and action to achieve a  transformation that can change the course for  mental health worldwide. The end goal is clear:  the Comprehensive mental health action plan  2013–2030 envisions a world where mental health  is valued, promoted and protected; where high  quality, culturally appropriate, acceptable and  affordable community-based mental health  care is available to everyone and anyone who  needs it; and where people living with mental  health conditions can participate fully in society  free from stigma, discrimination or abuse. Building on what has been achieved over the past  20 years, we must all strive to turn that vision  into reality. We must strengthen our collective  commitment to mental health and give it meaning,  value and parity of esteem as individuals,  communities and countries. We must intensify our  collective actions to reform mental health systems  towards comprehensive community-based  networks of support. And we must change  our collective actions to promote and protect  mental health and reduce disparities so that  everyone has an equal opportunity to flourish.  In 2021, WHO Member States recommitted  themselves to the Comprehensive mental health  action plan 2013–2030, updating it with new  targets and implementation options that build  on lessons learned over the past decade (3). The  updated plan provides a roadmap for action by all  stakeholders. Every country, no matter its resource  constraints, can do something substantial to  support change towards better mental health.  Business as usual for mental  health care simply will not do. 6 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

1.3 About this report  This report is designed to support the global transformation we need. It aims to strengthen how we  value and commit to mental health as a critical  contributor to population health, social well-being  and economic development. And it aims to  inspire a step-change in attitudes, actions and  approaches towards better mental health for all.  Drawing on the latest evidence available,  showcasing examples of good practice  from around the world, and giving voice to  people with lived experience, this report  highlights why and where change is needed  and how it can be achieved on the ground.  While acknowledging the need for a multisectoral approach and the relevance of this report to  numerous stakeholders, this report is especially  written for decision-makers in the health sector.  This includes ministries of health and other  partners in the health sector that are generally  tasked with developing mental health policy and  delivering mental health systems and services.  1.3.1 Scope This report focuses specifically on mental  health and people with mental health  conditions (see Box 1.1 Mental health terms). At times, the report also refers to neurological  disorders, substance use disorders and cognitive  and intellectual disabilities. While these conditions  are not the main focus, this report acknowledges that all of them can be, and often are,  closely linked with mental health conditions.  About one third of all people who experience  a substance use condition also experience a  mental health condition, and people with a  mental health condition are also more likely  to develop a substance use condition. Both  types of condition increase the risk of suicide  (8). And one in every four people who develop  epilepsy will also develop depression or anxiety  (9). In many countries, services for different  mental health, neurological and substance use  conditions are all combined at the point of care. As an organization made up of 194 Member  States and as a specialized agency of the United  Nations with lead responsibility for health,  WHO promotes and adopts a set of universal  values and rights, both in its work on norms and  standards as well as in country support. While  these global values and normative standards are  fully reflected in this report, each region, country  and setting is unique and requires a culturally  sensitive and contextually relevant approach to  mental health promotion, protection and care. This report is designed to support  the global transformation we need. Chapter 1 Introduction 7

BOX 1.1 Mental health terms  Mental health. A state of mental well-being that enables  people to cope with the stresses of life, to realize their  abilities, to learn well and work well, and to contribute  to their communities. Mental health is an integral  component of health and well-being and is more than the  absence of mental disorder.  Mental health condition. A broad term covering mental  disorders and psychosocial disabilities. It also covers  other mental states associated with significant distress,  impairment in functioning, or risk of self-harm. To bring  together and speak to the widest group of stakeholders  possible, this term is used throughout this report except  when discussing data that rely on defined categories of  mental disorder.  Mental disorder. As defined by the International  Classification of Diseases 11th Revision (ICD-11),  a mental disorder is a syndrome characterized by  clinically significant disturbance in an individual’s  cognition, emotional regulation, or behaviour that  reflects a dysfunction in the psychological, biological,  or developmental processes that underlie mental and  behavioural functioning. These disturbances are usually  associated with distress or impairment in personal, family,  social, educational, occupational, or other important areas  of functioning. This report uses this term when discussing  data that rely on defined categories of mental disorder. Psychosocial disability. Disability that arises when  someone with a long-term mental impairment interacts  with various barriers that may hinder their full and  effective participation in society on an equal basis with  others. Examples of such barriers are discrimination,  stigma and exclusion. INSIGHT BOX 1.1  Mental health terms  Mental health. A state of mental well-being that  enables people to cope with the stresses of life, to  realize their abilities, to learn well and work well, and  to contribute to their communities. Mental health is  an integral component of health and well-being and is  more than the absence of mental disorder.  Mental health condition. A broad term covering  mental disorders and psychosocial disabilities. It also  covers other mental states associated with significant  distress, impairment in functioning, or risk of  self-harm. To bring together and speak to the widest  group of stakeholders possible, the term “mental  health condition” is used throughout this report  except when describing data that rely on defined  categories of mental disorder.  Mental disorder. As defined by the International  Classification of Diseases 11th Revision (ICD-11),  a mental disorder is a syndrome characterized by  clinically significant disturbance in an individual’s  cognition, emotional regulation, or behaviour that  reflects a dysfunction in the psychological, biological,  or developmental processes that underlie mental  and behavioural functioning. These disturbances  are usually associated with distress or impairment in  personal, family, social, educational, occupational, or  other important areas of functioning. This report uses  the term “mental disorder” when discussing data  that rely on defined categories of mental disorder. Psychosocial disability. Aligned with the  Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,  psychosocial disability is disability that arises when  someone with a long-term mental impairment  interacts with various barriers that may hinder their  full and effective participation in society on an equal  basis with others. Examples of such barriers are  discrimination, stigma and exclusion. 8 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

2 KEY PRINCIPLES  DETERMINANTS STRUCTURAL DRIVERS Principles and  drivers in public  mental health

Chapter summary In this chapter we explore core concepts in mental health to show  that mental health is critically important to everyone, everywhere.  We define mental health as an integral part of our general health  and well-being and as a basic human right. We describe some of the  changes in how we experience mental health over the life-course and  explore how these are shaped by a complex interplay of individual,  family, community and structural determinants. We highlight the key  risks and protective factors for mental health and identify some of the  greatest threats to world mental health today. KEY MESSAGES FROM THIS CHAPTER Mental health has intrinsic and  instrumental value and is integral  to our general well-being. How we experience mental health  changes over the course of our lives. Everyone has a right to mental health. Mental health is relevant to many  sectors and stakeholders. Mental health is determined by a complex  interplay of individual, social and  structural stresses and vulnerabilities. Global threats to mental health today  include: economic and social inequalities; public health emergencies (including  COVID-19); humanitarian emergencies  (including conflict and forced displacement); and the climate crisis. 10 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

2.1 Concepts in mental health 2.1.1 Mental health  has intrinsic and  instrumental value Mental health is intrinsic and instrumental to the  lives of all people. It influences how we think,  feel and act. It underpins our ability to make  decisions, build relationships and shape the world  we live in. Mental health is also a basic human  right. And it is crucial to personal, community and  socio-economic development. It is a part of us, all  the time, even when we are not thinking about it.  Our mental health is as important as our physical  health. When we have mental health we can cope  with the stresses of life, realize our own abilities,  learn and work well and contribute actively to our  communities (see Box 1.1 Mental health terms).  Having mental health means we are better able to  connect, function, cope and thrive (see Fig. 2.1). Conversely, when our mental health is impaired,  and we lack access to appropriate support,  our well-being can worsen. A wide range of  mental health conditions can disturb our  thoughts and feelings, change our behaviours,  compromise our physical health and disrupt  our relationships, education or livelihoods. FIG. 2.1 Mental health has intrinsic and instrumental value, helping us to connect,  function, cope and thrive Have positive relationships Contribute to communities Get a sense of belonging Empathize with others Apply cognitive skills Gain an education  Earn a living Make healthy choices Learn new skills Realize our own abilities Feel good  Find purpose in live Think about our  well-being and that  of others Deal with stress Adapt to change Adopt new ideas Make complex choices Understand and  manage emotions CONNECT FUNCTION THRIVE COPE 11 Chapter 2 Principles and drivers in public mental health

Living with a mental health condition can impose  a substantial financial burden on individuals and  households (10). People experiencing mental  health conditions are also often stigmatized,  shunned, discriminated against and denied basic  rights, including access to essential care (11).  Partly because of these attitudes and responses,  having a mental health condition often goes  hand in hand with social isolation, interrupted  or unfinished education, and unemployment.  Neglecting the intrinsic and instrumental value of  mental health happens at the expense of individual  and family well-being as well as local and national  economies. Close to 15% of the world’s working  population is estimated to experience a mental  disorder at any given time (12). With mental health  linked to productivity, the potential impact on  economic performance and output is huge. Mental health is linked to practically every  key issue in international development. It  impacts, and is impacted by, many of the 17  Sustainable Development Goals that make  up the world’s blueprint for a better and  more sustainable future for all (see Table 4.3).  Without prioritizing mental health, many of  these goals will be difficult to meet (13). NARRATIVE   I live with schizophrenia and I have  mental well-being Charlene’s experience  My life is in no way defined by or confined within  my diagnosis of schizophrenia. I do have some  difficulties at times related to my diagnosis or to the  side-effects of medications. But by being empowered  and having a strong support system I am able to  manage these. I am a functional and productive member of  society. I have purpose in life, and I maintain good  relationships with family and friends. As the founder  and CEO of the Global Mental Health Peer Network  (GMHPN), an international mental health lived  experience organization, I contribute meaningfully  to society and the economy. I’ve led GMHPN to its  successes since inception and this has been the most  rewarding experience of my life and one of the key  elements that has contributed to my mental health  and well-being. I have the ability to recognize and develop my  strengths and learn from my weaknesses. I am  self-sufficient and independent. I know when I need  support and where to access it. Most importantly  I have mental well-being. I am mentally well. A  diagnosis of a mental health condition should never  be a precursor to defining mental well-being. Charlene Sunkel, South Africa 12 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

2.1.2 Mental health exists on a  continuum Diagnostic categories in clinical practice (and  health statistics) describe discrete and specific  mental disorders (see section 5.1.3 Evidence  to inform policy and practice). This is true  even though psychopathology falls along  multiple dimensions such as anxiety, mood,  perception, and social interaction (14).  Mental health is not a binary state: we are  not either mentally healthy or mentally ill.  Rather, mental health exists on a complex  continuum with experiences ranging from  an optimal state of well-being to debilitating  states of great suffering and emotional pain  (15). So mental health is not defined by the  presence or absence of mental disorder. Even though people with mental health conditions  are more likely to experience lower levels of mental  well-being, this is not always the case. Just as  someone can have a physical health condition  and still be physically fit, so people can live with a  mental health condition and still have high levels  of mental well-being (see Fig. 2.2). This may be true  even in the face of a diagnosis of a severe mental  health condition (read Charlene’s experience). Along the different dimensions of the continuum,  mental health issues and challenges present in  different ways and are experienced differently from  one person to the next, with varying degrees of  difficulty and distress and potentially very different  social and clinical outcomes. Depression and  anxiety, for example, can manifest as a short period  of mild or moderate distress that lasts a few hours,  days or weeks. But it can also manifest as a severe  condition that endures over months or years (16). FIG. 2.2  The relationship between mental well-being and symptoms of mental health  conditions Source: Tudor, [PHONE_REDACTED]. A person with no mental health condition is more likely to experience higher levels of mental well-being A person with mental health conditions can still experience high levels of mental well-being A person with no mental health condition can still experience low levels of mental well-being A person with mental health conditions is more likely to experience lower levels of mental well-being NO SYMPTOMS OF  MENTAL HEALTH CONDITIONS HIGH LEVEL OF MENTAL WELL-BEING SEVERE SYMPTOMS OF  MENTAL HEALTH CONDITIONS LOW LEVEL OF MENTAL WELL-BEING 13 Chapter 2 Principles and drivers in public mental health

2.1.3 Mental health is  experienced over the  life-course  Mental health is fluid. Over the course of our  lives, where we find ourselves on the mental  health continuum will fluctuate in response  to changing situations and stressors (read  Joanna’s experience). At any one time, a  diverse set of individual, social and structural  factors may combine to protect or undermine  our mental health and shift our position on  the mental health continuum (see section 2.2  Determinants of mental health). Some times  in our lives are more critical than others.  Our infancy and childhood set the  tone for the rest of our lives. In many ways, our prenatal environments, infancy  and early childhood can set the tone for the rest  of our lives. Most mental health conditions in  adults have their onset by adolescence. In early  childhood, a safe, secure and loving environment,  with responsive caregiving and opportunities for  early learning builds neural connections at a vital  time of early brain development (18). Conversely,  adverse experiences during early childhood,  including violence, neglect or death of a loved  one, can disrupt early brain development and  compromise the nervous and immune system for  life. Maternal depression can have long-lasting  adverse impacts on a child’s brain development. Adolescence is another developmentally sensitive  time for a person’s mental health. It is a crucial  period for developing the social and emotional  skills, habits and coping strategies that enable  mental health, including healthy sleeping patterns,  regular exercise, problem-solving and interpersonal skills. Many risk behaviours, such as use  of substances, start during adolescence and can  be particularly detrimental to mental health.  Suicide is a leading cause of death in adolescents.  Teen parents in particular are often at higher  risk of mental ill-health than their peers. Even in adulthood, family building can be a risky  time for mental health. For example, maternal  depression and anxiety can impair a mother’s  ability to bond with her baby. Throughout  adulthood, working life can also be difficult.  Unemployment and especially loss of employment  are known risk factors for suicide attempts  (19). And negative working environments are  associated with a greater risk of developing  depression, anxiety and work-related stress (20). At older ages, mental health continues to be  shaped by physical, social and environmental  conditions as well as the cumulative impacts  of earlier life experiences and specific stressors  related to ageing. For example, loss of functional  ability, musculoskeletal pain, bereavement  and isolation can all result in loneliness and  psychological distress. One in six older adults  experience elder abuse, often by their own carers,  with serious consequences for mental health (21). A life-course approach to mental health  acknowledges the critical risks and protective  factors that influence mental health at each stage  of life, and designs policies, plans and services  to address the needs of all age groups. It enables  decision-makers to pay attention to critical stages,  transitions and settings where interventions  to promote, protect and restore mental health  may be especially effective. This includes, for  example, emphasizing response to mental health  needs early in the life-course to prevent chronic  mental health problems throughout life. 2.1.4 Everyone has a right to  mental health Mental health is a basic human right for all  people. Everyone, whoever and wherever  they are, has a deserving and inherent  14 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

NARRATIVE Every step I take is a sign of progress  Joanna’s experience  Living with a mental disorder is not synonymous  with limitation. Society forces us to believe, perhaps  unintentionally, that we are not capable of having  responsibilities because of the crises we sometimes  face. I have often tried to erase that idea from my  mind but only now do I know that I too can move  forward, even as the battle within me continues. My  recovery is ongoing. I know I may still face obstacles  but now I have tools to overcome them. I don’t remember how old I was when my inner  emotional conflict arose but it was a long time ago.  In 2014 I had the first of several crises and so began  numerous visits to psychiatrists and psychologists.  I had to drop out of school because of excessive  anxiety and delusions that never left me alone. My  medication numbed me and I couldn’t concentrate.  I lost a scholarship at a major university. I walked  away from friends and family thinking they would  be disappointed in me. I locked myself in, I hardly  went out, I cried every day, and I didn’t have the  strength to get out of bed. The idea of a successful  future had vanished. This is the third time I’ve tried to start over from  scratch. I think I am not so bad at it. I set myself the  goal of going back to school and I have achieved  it. I am 25 years old and in my second semester  of linguistics, pursuing a career that I am really  passionate about. I have more goals to meet and challenges to  overcome but I think the important thing is not to  give up. Every step I take, even the small ones, is a  sign of progress. I used to wonder what the reasons  were for continuing this journey called life; thanks to  the support of my family, my friends, and the mental  health specialists that care for me I have found the  answer. What I mean to say is that, although it may  not seem like it, it is possible to find a way out and  there will be people willing to help you. Joanna Lovón, Peru right to the highest attainable standard  of mental health. This includes: •	 the right to be protected from mental  health risks; •	 the right to available, accessible, acceptable  and good quality care; and •	 the right to liberty, independence and  inclusion in the community. Having a mental health condition should never  be a reason to deprive a person of their human  rights or to exclude them from decisions about  their own health. Yet all over the world, people  15 Chapter 2 Principles and drivers in public mental health

with mental health conditions experience a  wide range of human rights violations (22).  Many are excluded from community life,  discriminated against, denied basic rights  such as food and shelter, and prohibited from  voting or getting married (see section 4.2.1  Action against stigma and discrimination). Many more cannot access the mental health  care they need, or can only access care that  violates their human rights. In many places, lack  of community-based services means that the  main setting for mental health care is long-stay  psychiatric hospitals or institutions, which are  often associated with human rights violations.  Improving access to quality mental health care  is inherent to, and indivisible from, a better life  for self and a better life for all (read Regina’s  experience). A rights-based approach to mental  health services protects those at risk of human  rights violations, supports those living with  mental health conditions, and promotes mental  health for all (23). The UN Convention on the  Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD)  needs to be implemented across the world.  2.1.5 Mental health is  everyone’s business The health sector has multiple roles in supporting  the population’s mental health (see Box 2.1  Four roles for the health sector). But so too do a  broad range of other sectors and stakeholders.  Because the underlying determinants of mental  health are multisectoral in nature (see section  2.2 Determinants of mental health), interventions to promote and protect mental health  To be in the open air is to be happy  Regina’s experience  My first hospitalization was in the children’s unit at the  state asylum, aged 14 years. When I was 18 years old I  ran away by jumping over the wall. Over time I got to  know all the psychiatric hospitals and every one was  terrifying. I wouldn’t wish that terror on anyone.  Now, thank God, I live in the community and I am free  to be in the open air. For everyone, to be in the open  air is to be happy. When my mind is empty I go out  to the street – to see people and talk to them. Even if  I’ve never seen them before in my life I stop and talk.  It is worthwhile to live in a supported home. It has  given me many good things – a house, a bed. In  my life I have been freezing, I have starved, I have  lived like a beggar. I can tell you it’s horrible. I thank  God for having found out about the supported  living service, otherwise I wouldn’t be here, in this  wonderful house.  Regina Célia Freire da Silva, Brazil NARRATIVE 16 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

17 Chapter 2 Principles and drivers in public mental health

should also be delivered in multiple sectors,  including health, social care, education,  child and youth services, business, housing,  criminal justice, the voluntary sector, the  private sector and humanitarian assistance. When it comes to delivering care, a similarly multisectoral and collaborative approach is needed.  This is because effectively supporting people with  mental health conditions often extends beyond  appropriate clinical care (usually given through  the health sector) to also include, for example: •	 financial support (through the social sector); •	 a place to stay (through the housing sector); •	 a job (through the employment sector); •	 educational support (through the  education sector); •	 community support (through the social  affairs sector); and •	 various legal protections (through the  judicial sector). Just as multiple government sectors are needed,  many other stakeholders – from policy-makers to  professionals to people with lived experience and  their families – need to be involved in promoting,  protecting and supporting people’s mental health.  Nongovernmental organizations, peer networks,  INSIGHT BOX 2.1 Four roles for the health sector  The health sector has four key roles in supporting  mental health for all. Provide care. The health sector can provide a range  of equitable and rights-based services, irrespective  of age, gender, socioeconomic status, race, ethnicity,  disability or sexual orientation. These services are  most useful when they are delivered at community  levels, by practitioners best suited to provide  effective care within the constraints of available  human and financial resources (see Chapter 7  Restructuring and scaling up care for impact). Promote and prevent. The health sector can  advocate for and provide promotion and prevention  programmes, in collaboration with other sectors.  Such programmes can build awareness and  understanding of mental health, end stigma and   discrimination, and lessen the need for treatment  and recovery services (see Chapter 6 Promotion and  prevention for change).  Work in partnership. The health sector can partner  with all stakeholders – in government, civil society,  the private sector and especially among people with  lived experience – to ensure multisectoral, inclusive  and people-centred support for people with mental  health conditions. Support related initiatives. The health sector can  advocate for and help address the structural risks  and protective factors influencing mental health – the  conditions in which people are born and live. This can  promote and contribute to a whole-of-government  and all-of-society approach to mental health. 18 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

traditional practitioners, faith-based organizations  and others have a crucial part to play. Depending  on circumstances and objectives, these stakeholders’ roles may range from advocacy and  activism to service provision and support. Working  in partnership across public and private sectors  can be an effective way of increasing the reach  and resources of collaborative programmes. People with lived experience are crucial stakeholders in mental health. Their participation  is vital to improve mental health systems,  services and outcomes (24). Such participation  includes full empowerment and involvement  in mental health advocacy, policy, planning,  legislation, programme design, service provision,  monitoring, research and evaluation (25). (For  more information on the role of people with lived  experience, see Chapter 4, In focus: Engaging  and empowering people with lived experience.) 2.2 Determinants of mental health Our mental health differs greatly depending on  the circumstances in which we are born, raised  and live our lives (26). This is because mental  health is determined by a complex interplay of  individual, family, community and structural  factors that vary over time and space and that  are experienced differently from person to  person (27). Mental health conditions result  from the interaction between an individual’s vulnerability and the stress caused by life  events and chronic stressors (see Fig. 2.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 2.2.1 Spheres of influence Individual psychological and biological factors  relate to individuals’ intrinsic and learned  abilities and habits for dealing with emotions  and engaging in relationships, activities, and  responsibilities. A person’s vulnerability to mental  health problems is influenced by psychological  factors (for example, cognitive and interpersonal  factors) and biological factors. Biological vulnerabilities include genetics, but also, for example,  high potency cannabis use, substance use by the  mother, and oxygen deprivation at birth. Brain  health is an important determinant because  many of the risk or protective factors impacting  mental health are mediated through brain  structure and function (29). A person’s mental  health also depends on the stressors in their  life, which are influenced by family, community  and structural factors in the environment. Family and community comprise a person’s  immediate surroundings, including their  opportunities to engage with partners, family,  friends or colleagues, opportunities to earn a  living and engage in meaningful activity, and also  the social and economic circumstances in which  they find themselves. Parenting behaviours and  attitudes are particularly influential, especially  from infancy through adolescence, as is parental  mental health. Harsh parenting and physical  punishment are known to undermine child mental  health, often leading to behaviour problems  (30). And bullying has been identified as the  leading risk factor for mental health problems  in the Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries  and Risk Factors Study [PHONE_REDACTED]. Local social  arrangements and institutions, such as access to  preschool, quality schools, and jobs, significantly  increase or reduce the opportunities that, in  turn, empower each person to choose their own  course in life. Restricted or lost opportunities  can be detrimental to mental health. 19 Chapter 2 Principles and drivers in public mental health

Structural factors relate to people’s broader  sociocultural, geopolitical and environmental  surroundings, such as infrastructure, inequality,  social stability and environmental quality. These  shape the conditions of daily life. Access to basic  services and commodities, including food, water,  shelter, health and the rule of law, is important  for mental health. So too are national social  and economic policies: restrictions imposed  during the COVID-19 pandemic for example  had significant mental health consequences for  many, including stress, anxiety or depression  stemming from social isolation, disconnectedness  and uncertainty about the future (see In focus:  COVID-19 and mental health). Security and  safety are important structural factors. And  prevailing beliefs, norms and values – especially  in relation to gender, race and sexuality – can  also be hugely influential. Historical legacies  of colonialism influence multiple structural  factors in numerous countries, as do climate and  ecological crises (see section 2.3.4 Climate crisis). Together, individual, family, community and  structural factors determine our mental health.  Importantly, these determinants interact with  each other in a dynamic way. For example, a  person’s sense of self-worth can be enhanced or  diminished depending on their social support  and economic security at the household level,  which may in turn rely on political stability, social  justice and economic growth in a country. Mental health is determined  by a complex interplay of  individual, family and community,  and structural factors. Even though the biological and social  determinants of mental health are hugely  influential, people are more than just their  biology and the external environment.  Individual psychological factors, as described  above, also play a role, and people have  choices and some agency over their existence,  even if such choices can be very limited for  people living in extreme adversity (32). Notably, each single determinant has only limited  predictive strength (33). Most at-risk people will  not develop mental health conditions and many  people with no known risk factor still develop  a mental health condition. Nonetheless, across  all these spheres of influence, the interacting  determinants of mental health can serve to  enhance or undermine mental health (see Fig. 2.4). 2.2.2 Risks undermine  mental health Although most people are remarkably resilient,  people who are more exposed to unfavourable  circumstances are at higher risk of experiencing  mental health conditions (34). In this context,  conflict, disease outbreaks, social injustice,  discrimination, and disadvantage are all  macro-risks that can result in new mental  health conditions for many and exacerbate  FIG. 2.3 When individual vulnerabilities interact  with stressors they can lead to mental  health conditions Lower risk of mental health conditions Higher risk of mental health conditions Low High Low Extreme STRESSORS INDIVIDUAL VULNERABILITY 20 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

FIG. 2.4 Examples of risks and protective factors that determine mental health Sources: WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Arango et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. STRUCTURAL FAMILY AND COMMUNITY INDIVIDUAL Genetic factors Social and emotional skills Sense of self-worth  and mastery Good physical health Physical activity Economic security Good quality  infrastructure Equal access to services Quality natural  environment Social justice  and integration Income and social  protection Social and gender equality Good perinatal nutrition Good parenting  Physical security and  safety Positive social networks,  social capital and social  supports Green spaces Genetic factors Low education Alcohol and drug use  Unhealthy diet Obesity and other metabolic risks Chronic disease Vitamin D deficiency Body dissatisfaction Sleep disturbances Obstetric complications  at birth Sexual abuse and violence Emotional and physical  abuse and neglect Substance use by mother  during pregnancy Bullying  Intimate partner violence Being a war veteran Sudden loss of a loved one Job strain Job loss and unemployment Urban living Being from an ethnic  minority Climate crisis, pollution or environmental  degradation Poor quality infrastructure Poor access to services Injustice, discrimination  and social exclusion Social, economic and  gender inequalities Conflict and forced  displacement Health emergencies RISKS Undermine mental health PROTECTIVE FACTORS Enhance mental health 21 Chapter 2 Principles and drivers in public mental health

existing mental health conditions for others (see  section 2.3 Global threats to mental health).  Adversity is one of the most  influential and detrimental  risks to mental health Individual, family and community, and  structural risks can manifest themselves at  all stages of life, but those that occur during  developmentally sensitive periods of life are  particularly detrimental, often continuing  to affect mental health for years or even  decades afterwards (see section 2.1.3 Mental  health is experienced over the life-course). Children with mental health problems and  cognitive impairments are four times more likely  to become a victim of violence than others (37).  Globally, more than half of all children aged  2–17 (around a billion individuals) experienced  emotional, physical or sexual violence in the  previous year (38). Adverse childhood experiences,  including exposure to violence, increase the risk of  developing a wide range of behavioural problems  and mental health conditions, from substance  use and aggression to depression, anxiety and  post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) (39, 40). Indeed, at all ages and stages of life, adversity  – including poverty, violence, inequality and  environmental deprivation – is a risk to mental  health. Populations who live in adverse conditions,  such as war zones, experience more mental  health conditions than people who do not (41). In many countries, the lack of secure  tenure for indigenous peoples makes them  particularly vulnerable to land acquisitions  and resource exploitation, creating social,  economic and environmental adversities  that heighten risks to mental health (42). Living in areas where the natural environment  has been compromised – for example, through  climate change, biodiversity and habitat loss,  exploitation or pollution – can also undermine  mental health. For example, growing evidence  suggests that exposure to air pollution is likely  to adversely affect the brain and increase the  risk, severity and duration of mental health  conditions at all stages of life (43, 44). Our gender, ethnic grouping and place of  residence can affect our chances of developing  a mental health condition. Women tend to be  more socioeconomically disadvantaged than  men and are also more likely to be exposed to  intimate partner violence and sexual violence  in the community, which are strong risk  factors for a range of mental health conditions,  especially PTSD (read Lion’s experience) (45).  Racism or discrimination against a particular  group in society increases the risk of social  exclusion and economic adversity, both of  which undermine mental health (46). Socially marginalised groups – including the  long-term unemployed, sex workers, homeless  people and refugees – tend to have higher rates  of mental disorder than the general population  but can have difficulties in accessing health care  (47). Other marginalized groups, including sexual  minorities and indigenous peoples, are similarly  at greater risk of depression, anxiety, suicide  attempts or suicides, and substance-related  problems (48). They too can find it difficult  to access the mental health services they  need (read Kat’s experience in Chapter 4). The vicious cycle of disadvantage Mental ill-health is closely linked to poverty  in a vicious cycle of disadvantage. This disadvantage starts before birth and accumulates  throughout life (36). People living in poverty can  lack the financial resources to maintain basic  living standards; they have fewer educational  and employment opportunities; they are more  exposed to adverse living environments; and they  are less able to access quality health care. These  22 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

daily stresses put people living in poverty at greater  risk of experiencing mental health conditions. Similarly, people experiencing severe mental  health conditions are more likely to fall into  poverty through loss of employment and  increased health expenditures. Stigma and  discrimination may also undermine their social  support structures. They are vulnerable to a  downward spiral of lost resources and social  exclusion that can worsen existing mental health  conditions and increase the risk of substance  use, poor parenting or failure at school. This  then reinforces the vicious cycle between  poverty and mental ill-health (see Fig. 2.5). Whether or not someone develops mental  health problems or moves into poverty, how  long this lasts, and whether or not they can  secure a route out, can in part be influenced  by their access to quality social protection and  health services (49). Embedding mental health  in universal health coverage – so that all people  can receive the mental health services they need  without suffering financial hardship – is critical  (see section 5.3 Financing for mental health). More than 80% of all people with mental disorders  live in low- and middle-income countries  (LMICs), where the vicious cycle between mental  health and poverty is particularly prevalent  because of a lack of welfare safety nets and poor  accessibility to effective treatment (50, 51). FIG. 2.5 The vicious cycle between poverty and mental ill-health exacerbates mental health  conditions Risk-taking  behaviours, including  self-harm Alcohol and  drug use Mental health  conditions Reduced  livelihoods Domestic, and  interpersonal violence Poor educational  attainment and  school failure Poor parenting, including  harsh punishment and neglect MENTAL ILL-HEALTH POVERTY 23 Chapter 2 Principles and drivers in public mental health

NARRATIVE No one told me I was basically   a superhero Lion’s experience  I am a survivor of prolonged sexual abuse. My life  has fallen apart twice: the first time was when I was  abused and parts of me separated from myself to  survive; the second time was much later when I could  no longer keep ignoring what I had gone through and  I had a mental health crisis. It’s difficult to describe how confusing it is to grow up  within a life of constant pain and suffering. I felt good  when things were bad, and worried and terrified  when things were good. Sometimes I needed small  doses of pain because the withdrawal from it was  unbearable. Living with the expectation that abuse  will happen again soon means living in a state of  extreme sensory stimulation. I met with quite a few therapists and rehabilitation  experts. I did not receive a diagnosis of trauma, even  when I shared some of what I had gone through, and  unsurprisingly, therapy was not even slightly helpful.  I remember saying over and over again that I was  feeling detached from myself, that all I was trying to  do was to detach myself, and yet, no one spoke to me  about dissociation and the implications of trauma. The therapists interpreted everything I did as stemming  from my disorders. They told me that if I don’t do  exactly what they said, I wouldn’t be able to get out of it.  They told me that I just needed to give in; but giving in  was also what my rapist had asked me to do. No one told me that I was basically a superhero…  that my crisis showed I had been keeping the hell I’d  gone through to myself for too long. Eventually I contacted a trauma specialist, who  did a full evaluation and diagnosed me with  trauma-related dissociative identity disorder. This  diagnosis, which accounts for the repercussions of  childhood trauma, provided me with the recognition  and acknowledgment I was so desperate for and,  most importantly, with proper treatment. My therapist told me he was an external expert and I  was an internal expert and that if we worked together  as partners towards my recovery, we would succeed.  I recently celebrated ten years of therapeutic  partnership, and it is one of the longest and most  beneficial, safest relationships I have ever had. It is  thanks to this partnership that I am here today. Now I work as a peer expert, a personal medicine  coach and an advocate of lived experience. I am the  Head of the Lived Experience Department at Enosh,  the Israeli mental health association, and proud to  be part of a group of unique, powerful people who  contribute to highly influential transformations  within my country’s mental health system. I hope that in the future, survivors who want to  recover from the difficult experiences they’ve been  through will be treated like heroes, like humans who  have been through extreme human experiences, and  who deserve compassion, respect, and value. And  I will continue to pave this path, so that knowledge  based on personal experience can someday lead the  world’s future health systems. Lion Gai Meir, Israel 24 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

2.2.3 Protective factors build  resilience  Just as the risks to mental health span multiple  spheres of life, so too do the protective factors. Our social and emotional skills, attributes  and habits – which are established during our  formative years – are critical to enabling us to deal  with the stresses and daily choices of life. As such,  they are key protective factors for mental health. Family and community factors can also be  influential in supporting mental health.  Protective factors at these levels include  positive family interactions, quality education,  decent work conditions, safe neighbourhoods, community cohesion and shared  cultural meaning and identity (52). Nurturing and supportive parenting can help  protect people against developing mental health  conditions (18). Supportive families and carers  are important at any age and can be real enablers  of recovery for people living with mental health  conditions (read Eleni’s experience in Chapter 7). Protective factors include positive  parenting, quality education and  employment, safe neighbourhoods  and community cohesion. Throughout adulthood, employment under  decent working conditions is particularly  important for mental health. For people living with  schizophrenia or bipolar disorder, employment  can be an enormous source of stress, but it can  also promote recovery and is associated with  improved self-esteem, better social functioning  and a higher quality of life (53, 54). Employment  has also been shown to reduce symptoms of  depression and anxiety, while unemployment is  a known risk factor for suicide attempts (19). Local built and natural environments are  important. Safe neighbourhoods that are walkable  and offer leisure opportunities are associated  with fewer cases of depression and alcohol  abuse (52). And access to green and blue spaces  – including city parks, forests, playgrounds,  waterways and beaches – is also linked with  better mental health, with beneficial effects  on perceived stress, severity of symptoms and  short- and long-term restorative outcomes (55). Across the world, there is noteworthy progress in  reshaping structural factors that protect mental  health. For example, formal global mandates  for health and human rights should work as  protective structural factors. Likewise, greater  democracy and equal access to justice, reductions  in poverty and greater acceptance of diversity are  all important global trends that work towards  better mental health. WHO’s World Mental Health  Survey found that gender differences in rates of  depression were narrowing in countries as the  roles of women and men became more equal (56). At all levels, from individual to structural,  protective factors improve people’s  resilience. They can be a means to promote  and protect mental health, both within and  beyond the health sector (see Chapter 6  Promotion and prevention for change). 184 countries  have ratified the CRPD. 25 Chapter 2 Principles and drivers in public mental health

2.3 Global threats to mental health  Global threats to mental health are major  structural stressors with the potential to  slow worldwide progress towards improved  well-being. They affect whole populations  and so can undermine the mental health  of huge numbers of people (42).  Key threats today include: economic downturns  and social polarization; public health emergencies;  widespread humanitarian emergencies and forced  displacement; and the growing climate crisis. Some current global threats have emerged  very quickly and recently, such as the  COVID-19 pandemic (see In focus: COVID-19  and mental health). Others have gained  importance more slowly. Like other structural determinants, many of  the global threats to mental health interact  with each other. For example, the climate  crisis can prompt a humanitarian emergency  that in turn displaces many people. Similarly,  humanitarian emergencies can create an  economic downturn that forces displacement,  in turn fuelling more social polarization. Together, global threats heighten the risk  and compound the burden of mental  health conditions worldwide. 2.3.1 Economic and social  inequalities Economic downturns are associated with increases  in suicide rates (57). They also increase the risk  of depression, anxiety and alcohol use, probably  through their damaging effects on employment,  income, security and social networks (52). Countries with greater income inequalities and  social polarization have been found to have a  higher prevalence of schizophrenia, depression,  anxiety and substance use (52). In all cases, it is  the poorest groups that are hit the hardest. Economic downturns are associated  with increased suicide. In the United States, after the 2008 economic  crisis, “deaths of despair” rose among the working  age population. Suicide and substance-use  related mortality accounted for many of these  deaths, which have been explained by lost  hope due to unemployment, rising inequality  and declining community support (58). The COVID-19 pandemic has amplified  existing inequalities and steepening the social  gradient of mental health in many countries  (see In focus: COVID-19 and mental health). 2.3.2 Public health  emergencies Public health emergencies can have profound  and long-lasting impacts on people’s mental  health, both exacerbating pre-existing conditions  and inducing new ones. They can also impact  key infrastructure, disrupting basic services  and supplies and making it difficult to provide  affected people with formal mental health care.  The COVID-19 pandemic is the most prominent  global example and has severely impacted  people’s mental health all over the world (see  In focus: COVID-19 and mental health). 26 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

Research on the 2013–2016 Ebola epidemic  in West Africa shows that many people have  experienced acute and long-term mental  health and psychosocial effects (59).  •	 Fear of the virus can cause acute anxiety  and distress.  •	 The grief of losing loved ones to the virus can  last a long time.  •	 Survivors and their health care workers often  face extreme stigma and discrimination.  •	 Physical isolation of exposed individuals  and communities heightens the risk of  psychosocial impacts. •	 Outbreaks, and the response to them, can  break local support systems, depleting people’s  coping resources, fracturing communities and  undermining trust in health services. •	 Many survivors develop mental health  conditions, such as anxiety and mood disorders. Some infectious diseases are associated with  neurological complications that impact people’s  mental health. For example, Zika virus can lead to  congenital Zika virus syndrome and Guillain-Barré  syndrome (60). COVID-19 is also associated with  a range of neurological manifestations (61). 27 Chapter 2 Principles and drivers in public mental health

COVID-19 and mental health The COVID-19 pandemic quickly became one of the biggest global crises in  generations. It has had severe and far-reaching repercussions for health systems,  economies and societies. Countless people have died, or lost their livelihoods.  Families and communities have been strained and separated. Children and young  people in every country have missed out on learning and socializing. Businesses have  gone bankrupt. Millions people have fallen below the poverty line (62). Mental health has been widely affected. Plenty of us became more anxious during  various waves of COVID-19; but for some the pandemic has sparked or amplified  much more serious mental health problems. At the same time, mental health services have been severely disrupted, especially in the  first year of the pandemic. Staff and resources were often redeployed to COVID-19 relief.  Social measures frequently prevented people from accessing care, and in many cases fear  of the virus stopped people from seeking help. By early 2022 there were fewer disruptions,  but too many people still could not get the mental health support they needed. Of course, people in some places and circumstances have been more affected than  others. And as the pandemic evolved, national public health measures changed, as  did mental health stressors and impacts. Impacts during the early stages, when huge  uncertainty and high death rates fuelled widespread fear and distress, were quite  different from those seen during later stages, when isolation and fatigue became  bigger threats to well-being. The sections below describe the pandemic’s impact on mental health and mental  health services and summarize recommendations for response. IN FOCUS 28

NARRATIVE The impact of COVID-19 on mental  health cannot be made light of Esenam’s experience I live with bipolar disorder in Ghana, where  the COVID-19 pandemic has been an  unprecedented stressor to the mental health  of many individuals. I have many friends who  had relapses in their mental health because  of the increased levels of fear and panic. It  was almost as if fear was contagious. In Ghana, a great many people – including  health care workers, people with COVID-19,  children, women, youth and older adults – are  experiencing psychological distress and mental  health symptoms as a result of the pandemic. Most people are afraid to seek help because they  think that if they visit the hospital, they might  end up getting infected with COVID-19 because  of the virus’ subtle mode of transmission and  contraction. I myself did not go to the clinic  for therapy for an entire year partly because  of this fear. I was also unemployed at the time  and did not have the funds for treatment.  But my pensioner parents managed to make  sure my medications were always refilled. I have been privileged to have a good system of  support. But it is not the same for others. Some  people could not afford treatment. It was and  still is a very difficult time for a lot of people. The  impact of COVID-19 on mental health cannot be  underestimated. It cannot be made light of. Esenam Abra Drah, Ghana  Mental health stressors The COVID-19 pandemic has created several short- or  long-term stressors for mental health (63). Stress from the potential health impacts of the  virus. For some people, and especially during the  early months – when little was known about the  virus and there were strict public health and social  measures – the fear of infection and death (both for  oneself and for loved ones) was distressing (read  Esenam’s experience). At that time, bereavement  could be particularly distressing because normal  grieving processes and funeral rites were disrupted  (64). Throughout the pandemic some people  experienced major adversities: getting very ill;  experiencing post-COVID condition; or witnessing  suffering and death, which, like any adversity, can  impact on mental health.  Stress from public health and social measures.  National and localized quarantines and physical  distancing rules, imposed to protect people’s health,  also reduce the social connections and day-to-day  29 Chapter 2 Principles and drivers in public mental health

support that contribute to mental health. These  measures made many people isolated, lonely, bored  or helpless. They strained relationships or affected  family functioning, leading to anger and aggression  against children, partners and family members  (65). For some people – especially older adults,  children and people with learning or developmental  disabilities – losing or changing routines has been  very stressful. Similarly, disruptions to mental health  services have distressed people who need treatment  and support. Stress from unemployment and financial  insecurity. Unemployment, poverty and adversity  are known risk factors for mental health conditions  (see section 2.2.2 Risks undermine mental health).  In early 2020, an acute global recession left millions  of people jobless and prompted an unprecedented  rise in extreme poverty (62). Recovery has been slow.  In 2022 (at time of writing), the pandemic continued  to affect labour markets, the increase in poverty  lingered and global unemployment remained above  pre-pandemic levels (63). Stress from false information and uncertainty. At  the start of the pandemic, poor knowledge, rumours  and misinformation about the virus fuelled fears  and worries. Extensive media coverage of illness,  death and misfortune have further contributed to  population distress. The COVID-19 “infodemic” has  continued to spread incorrect information, including  intentional disinformation, with the potential to  undermine both physical and mental health (66). Widespread distress Many people have proved resilient to the new  stresses and vulnerabilities created by COVID-19.  They have reported healthy coping mechanisms,  for example linked to outdoor activities and green  spaces or to regular contact with friends and family  and informal community-based support (67). But just as there has been extensive resilience, a  great number of people have reported mental health  problems since the pandemic began, including  psychological distress and symptoms of depression,  anxiety or post-traumatic stress. People may resort to  negative coping measures, including using alcohol,  drugs, tobacco, and spending more time on addictive  behaviours, such as gambling or online gaming. All  these compound the risks to mental health (63). As part of the Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries  and Risk Factors Study 2020 (GBD 2020), researchers  estimated a 25–27% rise in the prevalence of depression  and anxiety in the first year of the pandemic (see Box  3.2 Depression and anxiety in times of COVID-[PHONE_REDACTED].  A recent WHO umbrella review confirmed a significant  rise in these conditions, especially during the initial  months of the pandemic (69). From the start there was concern that suicide rates  would also rise as risk factors increased, and due to  the well-recognized link between suicidal behaviours  and economic hardship. But initial reports have been  mixed: some studies showed a rise, others showed a  fall (69). There is however usually a significant delay  between collecting and releasing national suicide  statistics, so early data showing stable rates does not  confirm that suicidal behaviour is not an issue. Indeed, there have been worrying signs of more  widespread suicidal thoughts and behaviours. For  example, there are indications of increased self-harm  among adolescent girls and increased suicidal  thoughts among health care workers (69). The rise  in suicidal thoughts and behaviours was driven by  low social support, physical and mental exhaustion,  poor physical health, sleep disturbances, isolation,  loneliness and mental health difficulties. Variable vulnerabilities The mental health impacts of the pandemic are  felt unequally across society, with some groups  of people affected much more than others. And  the pandemic has exacerbated many health and  social inequalities. Vulnerability varies by context,  but groups that have often been at greater risk of  30 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

adverse mental health outcomes include young  people, women, people with pre-existing conditions,  those from minority ethnic communities, and the  socioeconomically disadvantaged. Many of these  characteristics can overlap. Studies show that younger people have been more  affected than older adults (69). Extended school and  university closures interrupted routines and social  connections, meaning that young people missed out  on learning and experiences expected for healthy  development. Disruption and isolation can fuel  feelings of anxiety, uncertainty and loneliness, and  can lead to affective and behavioural problems (70).  For some children and adolescents, being made to  stay at home is likely to have increased the risk of  family stress or abuse, which are known risk factors  for mental health problems. Studies also show women have been more affected  than men (68). They were, and continue to be,  more likely to be financially disadvantaged due  to lower salaries, fewer savings, and less secure  employment than their male counterparts. Women  have also borne a large brunt of the stress in the  home, especially when they provided most of  the additional informal care required by school  closures. A rapid assessment concluded that  violence against women and girls intensified in  the first year of the pandemic, with 45% of women  reporting they had experienced some form of  violence, either directly or indirectly (65). Another vulnerable group has been people with  pre-existing mental health conditions. They are  not more susceptible to COVID-19 infection, but  when infected, they have been more likely to get  severely ill, be hospitalized, or die (69). There can  be many reasons for this health inequity. Social  determinants, including economic deprivation,  poor access to health care and lower health literacy,  may play a part. Other clinical risk factors for severe  COVID-19, including noncommunicable diseases and  immunological disturbances, are also more prevalent  among people living with mental health conditions. Service disruptions Before the pandemic, decades of chronic neglect  and underinvestment meant there was limited  access to quality, affordable mental health care in  many countries. In early 2021, as COVID-19 rapidly  spread across the globe, almost all mental health  services were disrupted or suspended as staff and  infrastructure were diverted to support the response. Services and supports delivered through community  providers were greatly disrupted, with local groups  and drop-in centres closed or cancelled for several  months. School-based mental health programmes  have been particularly badly affected. More than two years into the pandemic, health  systems, including mental health services, continue  to experience heavy pressure. COVID-19 continues  to disrupt essential health services everywhere  and widen the treatment gap for mental and other  health conditions. In early 2022, 44% of countries  responding to a WHO survey reported one or  more disruptions to mental health care, including  prevention and promotion programmes, diagnosis,  treatment and life-saving emergency care (71). Since the beginning, mental health service providers  have been working to mitigate service disruptions,  for example by delivering care via alternative routes  when public health and social measures were in  place. This has included providing more home-based  services, offering more tele-mental health support  (see Chapter 5, In focus: Harnessing digital  technologies for mental health). Still, there have  been significant barriers to delivering and accessing  digital solutions, particularly in countries with limited  infrastructure, pre-existing inequalities or low levels  of technological literacy. Community-based initiatives were often faster  to adapt, finding innovative ways to provide  psychosocial support, including through digital  technologies and informal supports. 31 Chapter 2 Principles and drivers in public mental health

Many countries have made efforts to develop or  adapt psychological interventions to treat or prevent  pandemic-related mental health conditions and to  improve resilience, especially among health care  workers and people with COVID-19. This includes, for  example, relaxation training, digital interventions,  and guided crisis interventions. Within the first six months of the pandemic most  countries surveyed by WHO – including half of all  low-income countries – had built mental health and  psychosocial support (MHPSS) into their national  COVID-19 response plans (72). And by early 2021,  the number of country-level multisectoral MHPSS  coordination groups in humanitarian settings had  doubled (73). But by the end of 2021, more than a third  of countries surveyed by WHO had still not allocated  any additional funding to deliver MHPSS (71). Recommendations for  response Throughout the pandemic, WHO has worked with  partners within the Inter-Agency Standing Committee  (IASC) to develop and disseminate multi-lingual  and multi-format guidance, tools and resources to  support responders, public health planners and the  general public (74, 75). In January 2021 the WHO  Executive Board emphasized the need to integrate  MHPSS within all aspects of preparedness and  response for all public health emergencies (76). In  order to minimize the mental health consequences  of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Executive Board also  urged Member States to: •	 Apply a whole of society approach to promote,  protect and care for mental health. This  means, among other things: including MHPSS  in national responses; protecting people from  harmful activities such as domestic violence  or impoverishment (for example through  social and financial protection measures);  and communicating widely about COVID-19 to  promote mental health. •	 Ensure widespread availability of mental health  and psychosocial support. This includes, for  example: scaling up access to remote support such  as self-help; supporting community action that  promotes social cohesion (for example befriending  initiatives); including mental health and social  care in essential services to ensure uninterrupted  in-person care; and protecting the human rights of  people with mental health conditions, especially in  any emergency legislation. •	 Support recovery from COVID-19 by building  mental health services for the future. This is  about building back better and using the pandemic  as an opportunity to advocate for a reorganization  and scaling up of mental health services and  systems. In particular, it is about implementing  the updated Comprehensive mental health action  plan 2013–2030, which was approved by the  Seventy-fourth World Health Assembly in 2021. 32 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

2.3.3 Humanitarian  emergencies and forced  displacement In 2022, 274 million people were estimated  to need humanitarian assistance, marking a  significant rise from the previous year, which was  already by far the highest figure in decades (77). People with severe mental health conditions  are extremely vulnerable during and after  emergencies (78). Inevitable disruptions to all  health services during an emergency means  people with severe mental health conditions  struggle to access the services and support they  need. And whether they are living in communities  or institutions, anybody with mental health  conditions is at increased risk of human rights  violations during humanitarian emergencies (79). Risks to mental health, such as violence  and loss, as well as poverty, discrimination, overcrowding, food insecurity and  the breakdown of social networks are also  widespread in humanitarian emergencies.  For example, malnutrition is common during  war and is associated with developmental  delays and mental health conditions (80). Almost all people affected by emergencies will  experience psychological distress. For most  people, this improves over time. But for others,  the impacts on mental health can endure. One in five people living in settings affected by  conflict in the preceding ten years is estimated  to have a mental disorder (81). Mental disorders  are also estimated to be very common among  survivors of natural disasters (82). Experiencing  a disaster increases the risk of problematic  substance use, especially among people with  pre-existing problems (82). Frontline responders,  such as emergency care providers and relief  workers, are at particular risk of mental health  problems, both in the short and long term. Estimates suggest 84 million people  worldwide were forcibly displaced during  2021. These include refugees, asylum seekers  and internally displaced persons who have  been forcibly displaced from their homes by  conflict (83). Mental health conditions such  as depression, anxiety, PTSD and psychosis  are much more prevalent among refugees  than among host populations (84). Various stresses can affect the mental health  and well-being of people who are forcibly  displaced, both before and during their flight,  including any stay in displacement settings  such as refugee camps (85). This includes  exposure to challenging and life-threatening  conditions such as violence, detention or lack  of access to basic services. When settling in  a new place, people who have been forcibly  displaced often find it difficult to access  mental health care and may face poor living  conditions, adverse socioeconomic conditions,  discrimination, isolation, strained family and  support networks, uncertainty around work  permits and legal status (asylum application),  and in some cases immigration detention. Overall, armed conflict is extremely damaging  to societies, creating grievances, hatred and  social divisions that not only impact mental  health but can also heighten the risk of further  violence. Addressing the social and mental health  On average  1 in 5 people  in settings affected  by conflict have a  mental disorder. 33 Chapter 2 Principles and drivers in public mental health

impacts of emergencies is thus not only part of  humanitarian emergency preparedness, response  and recovery but also of peacebuilding (86). 2.3.4 Climate crisis The risks that the growing climate crisis pose  to people’s physical health have long been  established (87). Evidence is now accumulating  to show the climate crisis can also impact  mental health, through stresses and risks  imposed by extreme weather events as  well as through longer-term environmental  change such as rising temperatures, rising sea  levels, air pollution, prolonged droughts and  gradual spread of climate-sensitive diseases. Both extreme weather events and  incremental change can also lead to conflict  and forced migration, which present  significant risks to mental health. Extreme weather events – including tropical  storms, floods, mudslides, heatwaves, and  wildfires – have increased by at least 46%  since [PHONE_REDACTED]. They can result in depression,  anxiety, PTSD and other stress-related  conditions for many of those affected (81, 89). Higher ambient temperatures  are linked with higher risk of  hospitalization, suicidal behaviour  and death for people with  mental health conditions. Incremental environmental change can also  be devastating. It can upset food and water  supplies, alter growing conditions, reshape  natural habitats and landscapes and weaken  infrastructure. It can cause people to lose their  homes and force communities to disperse. It can  result in financial and social stress, and increase  the risks of poverty, food insecurity, violence,  aggression and forced displacement (90, 91).  Even watching the slow impacts of climate change  unfold can be a source of stress. Various terms  have emerged to describe the psychological  reactions people experience, including “climate  change anxiety”, “solastalgia”, “eco-anxiety”,  “environmental distress”, and many others.  Whatever the label, the anxiety and despair  felt, increasingly reported by young people, can  be considerable and may put people at risk of  developing mental health conditions (89). Despite contributing the least to the climate crisis,  low-income countries are more likely to experience  greater risk, due to both climate-related impacts  and fewer resources to address these impacts. Young people, indigenous peoples, people living  in poverty, and people with cognitive or mobility  impairments may also be more vulnerable to the  mental health consequences of the climate crisis  (92). Higher ambient temperatures have been  linked with higher risk of worsening symptoms,  hospital admission, suicidal behaviour, and death  for people with mental health conditions (93). Risk  may also be higher in people taking psychotropic  medication, possibly because people on these  medicines may be less able to regulate heat or  notice that their body temperature is rising (94). A number of protective factors have been  identified that may promote resilience in  the face of the climate crisis, including social  support and mental health literacy (95). 34 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

3 EPIDEMIOLOGY  ECONOMIC COSTS  KEY GAPS  DEMAND FOR CARE World mental  health today

Chapter summary In this chapter we outline the state of mental health and mental health  systems in the world and show that mental health needs are high and  that responses are insufficient and inadequate. We present the latest  data available on the global prevalence and cost of mental disorders,  looking beyond the impact of mortality and disability to also consider  the formidable economic and social costs involved. This chapter also  highlights the results of WHO’s most recent Mental health atlas to reveal  some of the enduring critical gaps in, and barriers to, mental health care  around the world.  Key messages from this chapter are: In all countries, mental disorders are highly  prevalent and largely undertreated.  Mental disorders are the leading cause  of years lived with disability and suicide  remains a major cause of death globally.  The economic consequences of mental  health conditions are enormous,  with productivity losses significantly  outstripping the direct costs of care. Mental health systems all over the world  are marked by major gaps in governance,  resources, services, information and  technologies for mental health. Several factors stop people from seeking  help for mental health conditions,  including limited access to quality  services, low levels of health literacy about  mental health, and pervasive stigma. 36 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

Despite mental health’s critical importance to our health and well-being, too  many of us do not get the support we need. In 2019, an estimated one in eight  people globally were living with a mental disorder (96). At the same time, the  services, skills and funding available for mental health remain in short supply,  and fall far below what is needed, especially in LMICs. In all countries, mental health conditions are widespread (yet misunderstood)  and undertreated, and services to address them are insufficiently resourced  (see Fig. 3.1). And, as discussed in Chapter 2 Principles and drivers in public  mental health, the various interacting biopsychosocial factors that undermine  mental health – ranging from population-wide stressors such as poverty,  conflict and social inequalities to individual factors such as low self-worth –  will continue to generate threats to mental health for the foreseeable future. This chapter presents the latest data available at the time of writing (see Box  3.1 Data for assessing world mental health). In most cases, the data pre-date  the COVID-19 pandemic, which has greatly exacerbated the risk factors for  mental health conditions for many people. The pandemic is sure to impact the  prevalence and burden of mental disorders, just as access to mental health  services has been compromised (see Chapter 2, In focus: COVID-19 and mental  health). A long-term upsurge in the number and severity of mental health  conditions worldwide has been anticipated and, as shown below, the most  recent global estimates confirm this (97, 69). FIG. 3.1 Mental health conditions are widespread, undertreated and under-resourced Source: IHME, [PHONE_REDACTED]; WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]. live with a mental health condition people with psychosis do not receive mental health services  of health budgets, on average, go to mental health   1 in 8 71% WIDESPREAD UNDERTREATED UNDER-RESOURCED 2% 37 Chapter 3 World mental health today

INSIGHT BOX 3.1 Data for assessing world mental health  To speak to the broadest group of stakeholders  possible, this report generally uses the umbrella  term “mental health conditions”, which covers  mental disorders, psychosocial disabilities and other  mental states associated with significant distress,  impairment in functioning, or risk of self-harm.  But when describing prevalence rates and global  health estimates in this chapter, we refer to “mental  disorders” since this term more accurately reflects  data that are being collected and reported, and its  scope is clearly defined by WHO’s ICD-11. We similarly  refer in this chapter to diagnostic categories such as  “depressive disorders” or “anxiety disorders”, rather  than using the more general terms “depression” and  “anxiety” as we do elsewhere in this report. Mental disorders are distinct from neurological  disorders and substance use disorders. The latter  two, while not a focus of this report, are mentioned in  this chapter to give a broad picture of the needs that  mental health decision-makers often are responsible  for in LMICs.  Measurement and monitoring of disease incidence,  prevalence and mortality as well as disease  distribution and determinants within and across  populations – the defining features of epidemiology –  provide vital information for health service planning,  delivery and evaluation. The primary international  sources of epidemiological data used in this chapter  are WHO’s Global Health Estimates (GHE) and the  Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries and Risk Factors  Study 2019 (GBD 2019) by the Institute of Health  Metrics and Evaluation (IHME). These are closely  linked in terms of mental health estimates. Together,  they provide point prevalence and associated  disease burden estimates for all major categories of  communicable and noncommunicable diseases as  well as injuries. The term ‘burden of disease’ is only used in relation  to published epidemiological assessments. This is the  standard term used in public health for population-level  impact estimates (e.g., disability-adjusted life years,  years of life lost to premature mortality and years of  healthy life lost to disability). Estimates have to be interpreted with caution. These  long-standing global studies offer the best available  evidence of the extent, distribution and public health  impact of mental disorders across age groups, gender  and countries (grouped by income or geographical  location). But while current estimates incorporate  the latest available data and methodological  advances in disease modelling, they remain uncertain  because of the paucity of epidemiological data for  mental disorders in many countries. In particular,  estimates are often based on incomplete input data  that do not cover all parameters or all countries,  and on information that is outdated or poor quality.  Moreover, it is important to acknowledge that  mental disorders can be conceptualized in different  ways across cultures, which raises challenges for  measuring them from a particular reference point,  such as in the global burden of disease studies. 38 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

3.1 Epidemiological overview 1 This estimate includes people living with schizophrenia, depressive disorders (including dysthymia), anxiety disorders,  bipolar disorder, autism spectrum disorders, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, conduct disorder, idiopathic developmental intellectual disability, eating disorders and other mental disorders, as covered in the GBD 2019.  3.1.1 Prevalence Pre-pandemic, in 2019, an estimated 970 million people in the world were  living with a mental disorder, 82% of whom were in LMICs (96).1 Between 2000  and 2019, an estimated 25% more people were living with mental disorders,  but since the world’s population has grown at approximately the same rate  the (point) prevalence of mental disorders has remained steady, at around  13% (see Fig. 3.[PHONE_REDACTED].  Additionally, according to various estimates, 283 million people had alcohol  use disorders in [PHONE_REDACTED], 36 million people had drug use disorders in [PHONE_REDACTED], 55 million people had dementia in [PHONE_REDACTED]and 50 million people had  epilepsy in [PHONE_REDACTED]. In many countries mental health care systems are responsible for the care of people with these conditions. 970  million  people globally  were living  with a mental  disorder in 2019. 39 Chapter 3 World mental health today

FIG. 3.2 The global prevalence of mental disorders in 2019 Source: IHME, [PHONE_REDACTED]. The prevalence of mental disorders varies with  sex and age (see Table 3.1). In both males and  females, anxiety disorders and depressive  disorders are the two most common mental  disorders. Anxiety disorders become prevalent  at an earlier age than depressive disorders,  which are rare before ten years of age. They  continue to become more common in later life,  with highest estimates in people between 50  and 69. Among adults, depressive disorders are  the most prevalent of all mental disorders. In 2019, 301 million people globally were living  with anxiety disorders; and 280 million were  living with depressive disorders (including both  major depressive disorder and dysthymia).  In 2020, these numbers rose significantly as a  result of the COVID-19 pandemic (see Box 3.2  Depression and anxiety in times of COVID-19). Schizophrenia, which occurs in 24 million  people and in approximately 1 in 200 adults  (aged 20 years and over), is a primary concern  of mental health services in all countries (see  Table 3.1). In its acute states, it is the most  impairing of all health conditions (see Box  3.3 Severity of mental health conditions and  the principle of vertical equity) (103). Bipolar  disorder, another key concern of mental health  services around the world, occurs in 40 million  people and approximately 1 in 150 adults  globally in 2019 (see Table 3.1). Both disorders  primarily affect working-age populations. High-income countries Upper middle-income countries All countries Lower middle-income countries Low-income countries 13% of global population is  living with mental disorders [PHONE_REDACTED]% global population living  with a mental disorder 47.6% 52.4% males females people living with mental disorders 970 milion  Schizophrenia   Developmental disorder (idiopathic)   Conduct disorders    Attention-deficit/hyper-activity disorder    Autism spectrum disorders    Eating disorders   Anxiety disorders  Bipolar disorder   Depressive disorders 31.0% 28.9% 11.1% 0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 40 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

TABLE 3.1 Prevalence of mental disorders across age and sex (2019) Source: IHME, [PHONE_REDACTED]. a Includes major depressive disorder and dysthymia. b Includes all anxiety disorders and PTSD. c Includes anorexia and bulimia nervosa. d For more information on developmental disorder and autism spectrum disorders see the forthcoming WHO-UNICEF Report on Developmental  Delays and Disabilities. e A residual cause within GBD which includes personality disorders. Note. These are GBD 2019 data and do not necessarily represent ICD-11 categorization. Blank cells indicate 0.0%. Rates are adjusted for  independent comorbidity but not for dependent comorbidity. All prevalence data reflect point prevalence, except for bipolar disorder for which a  12-month prevalence was calculated. ALL AGES  (MILLIONS) ALL AGES (%) AGE (%) AGED 20+ YEARS (%) ALL MALE FEMALE < [PHONE_REDACTED]+ ALL MALE FEMALE Mental disorders 970 13.0 12.5 13.5 3.0 7.6 13.5 14.7 14.1 14.9 14.7 13.1 14.6 13.4 15.7 Schizophrenia 24 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.2 0.5 0.5 0.4 Depressive  disordersa 280 3.8 3.0 4.5 0.1 1.1 2.8 4.0 4.8 5.8 5.4 5.0 4.0 6.0 Bipolar disorder 40 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.2 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.5 0.7 0.7 0.7 Anxiety disordersb 301 4.0 3.0 5.0 0.1 1.5 3.6 4.6 4.7 4.9 4.8 4.4 4.8 3.6 5.9 Eating disordersc 14 0.2 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 Autism spectrum  disorders 28 0.4 0.6 0.2 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.5 0.2 Attention-deficit/ hyper-activity  disorder 85 1.1 1.7 0.6 0.2 2.4 3.1 2.4 1.7 0.9 0.3 0.7 0.4 1.1 Conduct disorder 40 0.5 0.7 0.4 1.1 3.6 2.1 Developmental  disorder  (idiopathic)d 108 1.5 1.5 1.4 2.2 2.3 2.2 2.0 1.8 1.3 0.7 0.4 1.1 1.1 1.1 Other mental  disorderse 117 1.6 1.9 1.3 0.1 0.4 1.0 2.2 2.6 2.7 2.2 2.7 1.8 41 Chapter 3 World mental health today

CASE STUDY BOX 3.2 Depression and anxiety in times of COVID-19 GBD 2020 estimated a substantial increase in  depressive and anxiety disorders as a result of the  COVID-19 pandemic, taking into account many of the  uncertainties around epidemiological estimates of  mental disorders in major emergencies. Before the pandemic, an estimated 193 million  people (2 471 cases per [PHONE_REDACTED]population) had  major depressive disorder; and 298 million people  (3 825 cases per [PHONE_REDACTED]population) had anxiety  disorders in 2020. After adjusting for the COVID-19  pandemic, initial estimates show a jump to 246  million (3 153 cases per [PHONE_REDACTED]population) for  major depressive disorder and 374 million ([PHONE_REDACTED]per [PHONE_REDACTED]population) for anxiety disorders.  This represents an increase of 28% and 26% for  major depressive disorders and anxiety disorders,  respectively in just one year. In both cases, the countries that were hit hardest by  the pandemic had the greatest increases in disorder  prevalence. All over the world, there was a greater  increase in disorder prevalence among females than  among males, likely because females were more  likely to be affected by the social and economic  consequences of the pandemic. And globally there  was also a greater change in prevalence among  younger age groups than older ones, potentially  reflecting the deep impact of school closures and  social restrictions on youth mental health. Source: COVID-19 Mental Disorders Collaborators, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 42 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

BOX 3.3 Severity of mental health conditions and the principle of vertical equity A key input into the WHO’s Global Health Estimates  (GHE) are the so-called "health state weights", which  are used to adjust time spent in a particular state of  health by its associated level of diminished health or  impairment (on a scale of 0 to 1, where 0 denotes full  health or no impairment). The most impairing state across all health  conditions – both in GHE 2019 and GBD 2019 – is  acute schizophrenia, which is given a health state  weight of 0.78. Put simply, this means an individual  experiencing acute schizophrenia is expected to  have only one fifth of the health and functioning of  a fully healthy person. Severe depressive episode is  considered the fifth most impairing health state; and  the residual state of schizophrenia is tenth. Estimating health state weights can also help to  inform discussions around “vertical equity”. This  concept means giving more attention to those with  greater need. It is distinct from horizontal equity,  which is focused on equal access or treatment for  equal need (such as ensuring equal access to care  in urban and rural areas). Indeed, several countries  have explicitly included the severity of a disease  or condition as a key criterion for priority-setting.  So, from a vertical equity perspective, care for  schizophrenia and other severe mental health  conditions, including severe episodes of depressive  disorder, should be accorded priority because of the  impairment involved. Sources: Barra et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]. INSIGHT Prevalence in males and females Depressive and anxiety disorders are about  50% more common among women than  men throughout the life-course, while men  are more likely to have a substance use  disorder. As depressive and anxiety disorders  account for most cases of mental disorder,  overall, slightly more women (13.5% or 508  million) than men (12.5% or 462 million) live  with a mental disorder (see Table 3.1). Mental disorders are common among pregnant  women and women who have just given birth,  often with severe impacts for both mothers and  babies. Worldwide, more than 10% of pregnant  women and women who have just given birth  experience depression (105). In LMICs this  figure is estimated to be substantially higher. Women who have experienced intimate partner  violence or sexual violence are particularly  vulnerable to developing a mental health  condition, with significant associations found  between victimization and depression, anxiety,  stress conditions including PTSD, and suicidal  ideation (106). Women living with a severe  mental disorder are much more likely to have  experienced domestic and sexual violence  during their life than other women (107). 43 Chapter 3 World mental health today

Prevalence in children and adolescents Around 8% of the world’s young children (aged  5–9 years) and 14% of the world’s adolescents  (aged 10–19 years) live with a mental disorder  (see Table 3.1). A seminal nationwide study  in the United States found that half of the  mental disorders present in adulthood had  developed by the age of 14 years; three quarters  appeared by the age of 24 years (108). Idiopathic developmental disorders, which cause  developmental disability, are the most common  type of mental disorder in young children, affecting  1 in 50 children aged under five years. The second  most prevalent mental disorder in young children is  autism spectrum disorder (another developmental  disorder), which affects 1 in 200 children aged  under five years (see Table 3.1). Both disorders  become gradually less prevalent with age, as many  people with developmental disorders die young. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and  conduct disorders are particularly common in  adolescence, especially among younger boys (4.6%  and 4.5%, respectively in boys 10–14 years of age).  Anxiety is the most prevalent mental disorder  among older adolescents (4.6%) and even more  so among adolescent girls (5.5%). Anxiety and  depressive disorders at this age may be associated  with bullying victimization. Eating disorders occur  mainly among young people and, within this group,  are more common among females (for example,  0.6% in women aged 20–24 years compared with  0.3% in men in the same age group) (109). Prevalence in older adults Around 13% of adults aged 70 years and over  lived with a mental disorder in 2019, mainly  depressive and anxiety disorders. Sex differences  in rates of mental disorders increase in this  age category as 14.2% of women and 11.7% of  men aged over 70 years are estimated to have  a mental disorder. Prevalence estimates for  schizophrenia are lower in adults aged over 70  years (0.2%) compared with adults under 70 years  of age (0.3%), which in part may be explained by  premature mortality (see section 3.1.2 Mortality). Notably, these estimates on mental disorders do  not include dementia, which is a key public health  concern that is often addressed by mental health or  aging policy and plans. An estimated 6.9% of adults  aged 65 years and over live with dementia (102). Geographical disparities Mental disorders are common in all countries: they  occur across all WHO Regions, ranging from 10.9%  prevalence in the WHO African Region to 15.6% in  the WHO Region of the Americas (see Fig. 3.[PHONE_REDACTED]. Mental disorders are somewhat more  common in high-income countries (15.1%)  but they are also common in low-income  countries (11.6%) (see Fig. 3.3). The variations in prevalence rates across regions  and income groups may be explained by at  least three factors. First, demographic factors  lessen prevalence rates in low-income countries:  populations here tend to have a higher proportion  of children under ten years of age, for whom mental  disorders are much less common. Second, war and  conflict contribute to the relatively higher rates  of mental disorder in WHO’s Eastern Mediterranean Region. Third, sociocultural factors have a  role. For example, differing cultural understandings and conceptualizations of mental health and  mental health conditions may influence people’s  readiness to disclose mental health symptoms in  surveys. Local cultural concepts of distress – which  can be associated with psychopathology – are  typically not well-covered in epidemiological  studies (111). And while stigma and discrimination  is high in all countries, it may even be higher in  many LMICs, which could lead to underreporting. Combining factors such as age, sex and  geographical location can reveal important  differences in people’s specific mental health  needs. For example, while an estimated 4% of all 44 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

FIG. 3.3 Prevalence of mental disorders across  WHO regions, 2019 Source: IHME, [PHONE_REDACTED]. age groups worldwide lived with anxiety disorders  in 2019 (see Table 3.1), the rate rises to around 10%  among working age women in the Americas (113). 3.1.2 Mortality Premature mortality Estimating mortality from mental health  conditions is complex. Both mental health  conditions and suicide are rarely recorded as the  cause of death on death certificates or in country  mortality statistics. Yet poor mental health is  often an important underlying or causative  factor. Across the world, people with mental  health conditions are known to experience  disproportionately higher mortality rates  compared with the general population (114). People with severe mental health conditions –  including schizophrenia and bipolar disorder – die  on average 10 to 20 years earlier than the general  population (115). Most of these deaths are due  to preventable diseases, especially cardiovascular disease, respiratory disease and infection,  which are more common in people with mental  health conditions. In these cases, having a mental  health condition may not be the cause of death,  but it is likely to be a major contributing factor. Side effects of medications for severe mental  health conditions can have a role in premature  mortality by contributing, for example, to  obesity, glucose intolerance and dyslipidemia  (116). Moreover, people with mental health  conditions are more likely to be exposed to the  well-known risk factors for noncommunicable  diseases (NCDs), including smoking, alcohol  use, unhealthy diet and physical inactivity. This is further exacerbated by the fragmented  approach health systems take in caring for physical  and mental health conditions: once a person is  channelled into a mental health service, their  physical health too often gets neglected. At the  same time, in both general and specialized mental  health care settings, the signs and symptoms  of physical illness are often misattributed to a  concurrent mental health condition in what is  known as “diagnostic overshadowing” (117). These  two factors have, for example, led to a systematic  under-recognition and undertreatment of cardiovascular conditions among people living with  schizophrenia and bipolar disorder (118, 119).  WHO and its expert advisers have developed a  multilevel intervention framework and guidelines  aimed at addressing these shortcomings (see  section 4.1.2 Improved physical health, subsection  Integrated care is good care) (114, 120). Prevalence of mental disorders (%)  WHO REGIONS Africa Eastern Mediterranean Europe Americas South-East Asia Western Pacific [PHONE_REDACTED].7% 13.2% 15.6% 14.2% 14.7% 10.9% People with severe mental  health conditions die  10 to 20 years  earlier than the general  population. 45 Chapter 3 World mental health today

The cumulative mortality burden of mental health  conditions can be derived using natural history  models that relate prevalence to observed rates  of excess deaths. These models are not part  of the estimation of fatal burden (see section  3.1.3 Burden), which attributes deaths to the  primary cause (such as cardiovascular disease),  but researchers have used these models to  show that the mortality burden of mental health  conditions is grossly underestimated. One  analysis of 2010 data shows there were more  than four million excess deaths attributable to  mental disorders, including 2.2 million from  major depressive disorder, 1.3 million from  bipolar disorder and [PHONE_REDACTED]from schizophrenia –  compared with just [PHONE_REDACTED]cause-specific deaths,  all from schizophrenia, calculated using the  standard burden of disease calculations (121). This huge yet hidden mortality burden of  mental health conditions has been labelled  a scandal, and one that contravenes international conventions for the right to the  highest attainable standard of health (122). Suicide Suicide accounts for more than one in every  100 deaths globally (123). And for every death  by suicide there are more than 20 suicide  attempts (124). Suicide affects people from all  countries and contexts. And at all ages suicides  and suicide attempts have a ripple effect on  families, friends, colleagues, communities  and societies (read Marie’s experience). In 2019, an estimated [PHONE_REDACTED]people across all  ages (or 9 per [PHONE_REDACTED]population) lost their life  to suicide (see Fig. 3.[PHONE_REDACTED]. Estimates of suicide  rates vary significantly across countries – from  fewer than two deaths by suicide per [PHONE_REDACTED]in some nations to more than 80 per [PHONE_REDACTED]in others. Around three-quarters (77%) of all  suicides occur in LMICs, where most of the world’s  population live. But high-income countries  grouped together have the highest suicide rates  at 10.9 per [PHONE_REDACTED]. These countries are also more  likely to have high-quality vital registration data. Suicide rates also vary between males  and females. Globally, women are more  likely to attempt suicide than men. And  yet twice as many men die by suicide than  46 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

women do. In high-income countries the  male-to-female ratio for death by suicide is  even higher, at three men to every woman.  In both males and females, suicide is a major  cause of death among young people. In 2019,  it was the third leading cause of death in  15–29-year-old females; and the fourth leading  cause of death in males in this age group. Overall,  it is the fourth leading cause of death among  15–29-year-olds and accounts for some 8% of all  deaths in this age group. More than half (58%) of  suicides happen before the age of 50 years. And  suicide rates in people aged over 70 years are more  than twice those of working age people (126). Globally, the suicide rate has dropped by 36%  since 2000, with decreases ranging from 17%  in WHO’s Eastern Mediterranean Region to 47%  in WHO’s European Region and 49% in WHO’s  Western Pacific Region. Yet, in WHO’s Region of  the Americas, suicide rates have increased 17%  over the past 20 years. (For more information on  and examples of successful suicide prevention  see section 6.3.1 Preventing suicide.)   FIG. 3.4 Suicides in 2019 Source: WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]. Global suicide rate:  9 per [PHONE_REDACTED]people died by  suicide in [PHONE_REDACTED]k suicides happen before the age of 50 58% drop in suicide  rates since 2000 Global age-standardized  suicide rate (per [PHONE_REDACTED]% [PHONE_REDACTED]Time Total suicide deaths (thousands) 85+ [PHONE_REDACTED]High-income countries Low- and middle-income countries Age groups Suicide accounts for  1 in 100 deaths globally. 47 Chapter 3 World mental health today

NARRATIVE 3.1.3 Burden  Burden of disease studies estimate the  population-wide impact of living with disease  and injury and dying prematurely. They involve  calculations using the Disability-Adjusted Life  Year (DALY), where one DALY represents the  loss of one year of full health. DALYs combine in  one measure the years of life lost to premature  mortality (YLLs) and years of healthy life lost to  disability (YLDs) to estimate the overall burden  from each cause of disease and injury. In 2019, across all ages, mental, neurological  and substance use disorders together accounted  for one in ten DALYs (10.1%) worldwide. Mental  disorders accounted for 5.1% of the global  burden (see Fig. 3.5). Neurological disorders  accounted for another 3.5%; while substance  use conditions accounted for 1.5%. In all countries, the burden of mental disorders  spans the entire life-course: from early life, where  conditions such as developmental disorders  and childhood behavioural disorders are the  biggest contributors to burden; through to  I abandoned everything   and everyone Marie’s experience I am a high-functioning lady living with a history of  trauma. I come from a family with a lot of experience  of mental health conditions, but my family and the  society we lived in didn’t acknowledge mental health  and didn’t know how to take care of a loved one living  with mental health challenges. We didn’t get the care  we needed. We lost my brother when he was just 33  years of age, without a conclusive diagnosis. I suffered with behavioural issues. My greatest  trauma was the breakdown of my parent’s marriage.  I struggled and self-medicated with dangerous  relationships and risky sexual behaviours. In 2009, I attempted suicide. I was five months  pregnant. Me and the baby survived, but I knew I  couldn’t continue this way. I abandoned everything  and everyone, including my three sons. I left my  country without a single word to anyone. Only a  mental illness makes you behave this way. I continued to struggle and eventually got professional  help. Four years later I returned as a much stronger  person. I am now a commonwealth scholar doing an  MSc in professional practice health care provision;  and committed to raising awareness of mental health  especially through people with lived experience  sharing their stories in countries like mine. Marie Abanga, Cameroon 48 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

adulthood and old age, where depressive and  anxiety disorders dominate. Overall, the greatest  burden is carried during early adulthood. Across all mental disorders, most of the burden  manifests as YLDs, rather than YLLs. This is because  of the way burden estimates are calculated, which  does not attribute any deaths to conditions such  as depressive disorders or bipolar disorder, and  which includes self-harm and suicide under a  separate category of intentional injuries (127). Mental disorders are the leading cause of  years lived with disability, accounting for one  in every six (15.6%) YLDs globally. Substance  use disorders account for a further 3.1% of  YLDs; and neurological conditions account  for 6.4%. Combined mental, neurological  and substance use disorders account  for one in every four YLDs globally. FIG. 3.5 The global burden of mental disorders  in disability-adjusted life years (DALYs),  2019 Source:  WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]. The contribution of mental disorders to YLDs  varies across the lifespan, from less than 10% for  children and older adults to more than 23% for  young people aged 15–29 years (see Fig. 3.6). Since 2000, both depressive and anxiety  disorders have consistently been among the  top ten leading causes of all YLDs worldwide.  FIG. 3.6 Proportion of all-cause years lived with  disability (YLDs) attributable to mental  disorders, across the life-course, 2019 Source:  WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 129m The global burden of mental disorders in DALYs, 2019. all DALYs 5.1% 54.1% 45.9% females males 39% 11.7% 22% Depression 6.5% Schizophrenia Anxiety 2.2% 3.3% 4.5% 7.1% 6.6% Eating disorders Autism spectrum Behavioural Bipolar Other IID YLDs  are attributable to mental disorders 15.6% [PHONE_REDACTED]days 1-59 months 5-14 years 15-29 years 30-49 years 50-59 years 60-69 years 70+ years Male Female 4.2% 3.2% 6.8% 5.1% 20.5% 18.3% 25.6% 23.7% 20.0% 18.7% 13.5% 14.5% 9.3% 10.7% 5.4% 6.2% Globally, mental  disorders account for  1 in 6 years  lived with disability. 49 Chapter 3 World mental health today

Depressive disorders alone are the second  leading cause of global YLDs, accounting  for 5.6% of all YLDs in 2019 (see Fig. 3.7). Two important risk factors for these common  mental disorders have been quantified as part  of GBD 2019: childhood sexual abuse (exposure  before 15 years to any unwanted sexual contact);  and bullying victimization (intentional and repeated  harm of children and adolescents attending school  by peers). In 2019, global age-standardized levels  of lifetime exposure to childhood sexual abuse  and bullying victimization in the preceding year  amounted to 9.4% and 7.3%, respectively (130).  Together, these modifiable risk factors accounted  for 7.1% of all anxiety disorder DALYs and 9.9% of  all major depressive disorder DALYs globally. FIG. 3.7 Top ten leading causes of global years lived with disability (YLDs), 2019 Source:  WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 3.2 Economic consequences In addition to the direct costs of treatment,  mental health conditions come with a variety  of indirect costs associated with reduced  economic productivity, higher rates of  unemployment and other economic impacts. These costs to society can be significant, often  far outstripping health care costs. Researchers  from the World Economic Forum calculated  that a broadly defined set of mental health  conditions cost the world economy approximately  US$ 2.5 trillion in 2010, combining lost economic  productivity (US$ 1.7 trillion) and direct costs  of care (US$ 0.8 trillion) (131). This total cost  was projected to rise to US$ 6 trillion by 2030  alongside increased social costs. That’s more  than the researchers projected for the costs of  cancer, diabetes and chronic respiratory disease  combined. LMICs were predicted to bear 35%  of the cost of these mental health conditions. Years lived with disability (000s) % YLDS CAUSE RANK 2.8 10 Oral conditions 3.3 9 Migraine 3.4 8 Iron-deficiency anaemia 3.4 7 Gynecological diseases 3.4 6 Anxiety disorders 3.9 5 Uncorrected refractive errors 4.4 4 Diabetes melitus 4.8 3 Other hearing loss 5.6 2 Depressive disorders 5.6 1 Back and neck pain 0 10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000 50,[PHONE_REDACTED]World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

The indirect costs related to mental health  conditions can also be significant to countries.  For example, in the Philippines, an analysis  calculated that in 2019 six conditions (psychosis,  bipolar disorder, depressive disorders, anxiety  disorders, alcohol dependence and epilepsy)  cost the national economy around US$ 1.3 billion  in lost productive capacity due to premature  death, disability and reduced productivity while  at work (132). Combined with the direct costs of  care (around US$ 53 million), this amounts to  0.4% of the country’s gross domestic product. Most recently, in 2020, a systematic review of  cost-of-illness studies from around the world  showed that the average annual societal cost  of mental health conditions – adjusted for  purchasing power parity to the US price level  – ranges between US$ 1180 and US$ 18313 per  treated person, depending on the condition  (133). This cost includes both direct costs of  treatment and other services as well as other  costs such as foregone production and income. The most costly mental health condition per  person globally was found to be schizophrenia.  Depressive and anxiety disorders were much  less costly per treated case; but they are much  more prevalent, and so majorly contribute  to the overall national cost of mental health  conditions. Across all conditions, nearly half  the total societal cost was found to be driven by  indirect costs such as reduced productivity (133). Of course, even cost-of-illness studies do not  provide a complete picture of the societal costs  of mental health conditions. Typically they do not  attach monetized value to people outside the paid  workforce, including carers and home-makers.  They only focus on productivity losses, rather than  on other social factors that individuals may value  more, such as interpersonal relationships. And,  importantly, they do not include intangible costs  such as any psychological pain experienced (133). 3.3 Gaps in public mental health In addition to affecting every country in the world  and being costly, mental health conditions are  also severely underserved. Results from the latest  assessment in WHO Member States – the Mental  health atlas 2020 – show that mental health  systems all over the world continue to be marked  by major gaps in governance, resources, services,  information and technologies for mental health  (see Fig. 3.8). These gaps are important because  they can severely hamper a country’s mental  health response. The sections that follow highlight  the defining features of some of the key gaps. 3.3.1 The information gap Limited mental health data In part, the information gap is about countries’  capacities for gathering, reporting and monitoring  reliable, up-to-date mental health data, including  on policies and laws, workforces and services. There has been much progress in the past  decade. Since 2014, the vast majority of  countries (88–91%) consistently report data  on mental health to WHO (5). And 76% of WHO  Member States confirmed their ability to report  against five core mental health indicators,  compared with 60% in 2014 and 62% in 2017.   51 Chapter 3 World mental health today

FIG. 3.8 A snapshot of key gaps in public mental health But often the data that are reported are  incomplete, particularly on service availability  and use, which can be difficult to track. Nearly half  of countries said they regularly compile data on  mental health service activity in the public sector  for policy, planning or management. In most  cases, especially among low-income countries,  these data are only compiled as part of general  Less than 5% of mental  health research funding  goes to LMICs. Most research is  basic rather than  clinical or applied. Most countries report   data to WHO but these are often incomplete. INCOMPLETE DATA INSUFFICIENT RESEARCH INFORMATION GAP SCANT SPENDING SCARCE WORKFORCE LACK OF ESSENTIAL  MEDICINES DIGITAL DIVIDE Countries spend on average just 2% of their health budget on mental health. In low-income countries, there are fewer than one mental health worker per [PHONE_REDACTED]population. Most households in least  developed countries do  not have internet access In LMICs, essential  psychotropics are often unavailable or unaﬀordable. RESOURCES GAP INADEQUATE POLICIES,  PLANS AND LAWS MISPLACED PRIORITIES Only 21% of countries report implementing policies and plans that fully comply with human  rights instruments. Two out of every three  dollars spent on mental  health goes to running  psychiatric hospitals. GOVERNANCE GAP POOR TREATMENT  COVERAGE LIMITED RANGE AND  QUALITY OF SERVICES 71% of people with  psychosis do not  receive mental  health services. Few countries provide psychosocial interventions in primary care. Few LMICs provide income,  housing, employment or education support. SERVICES GAP 52 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

health statistics and are not available for reporting  to WHO. A quarter of LMICs had not compiled  any mental health data in the past two years. In many cases, data reported from LMICs come  exclusively from public psychiatric hospitals, and do  not include mental health services and interventions  provided in general hospitals, community settings,  primary health care, schools or the private sector  (134). This is a major limitation, given the importance  of moving mental health care away from psychiatric  hospitals to community-based settings (see Chapter  7 Restructuring and scaling up care for change)  and the need to keep watch over these changes. The lack of comprehensive, independent and  comparable data poses a major barrier to  monitoring and accountability in mental health.  To address this challenge, the Countdown Global  Mental Health 2030 initiative uses a broad and  integrated set of indicators to track progress  in mental health (135). These indicators, which  to date have focused on child and caregiver  mental health, extend beyond those captured  by existing mental health service surveys such  as WHO’s Mental health atlas to also include  data on the determinants of mental health and  on factors that shape the demand or need for  mental health care. They are available through  an interactive, publicly-accessible dashboard,  which the initiative intends for use to inform  action towards improved mental health (136). Insufficient and imbalanced research The second part of the information gap is a gap  in research that could help countries develop and  implement relevant and tailored intervention  strategies. Analyses by the Mental health atlas  2020 show that while the absolute level of mental  health research output (as measured by published  studies reflected in research databases) has risen  by 12% since 2013, other health research output  has risen even faster, so the proportion of health  research that focuses on mental health is slightly  falling (from 5.0% in 2013 to 4.6% in 2019). The Mental health atlas 2020 also reveals major  differences in mental health research across  regions and income groups. In particular, the  proportion of a country’s health research output  that focuses on mental health is nearly three  times greater in high-income countries compared  with low-income countries (see Fig. 3.9). FIG. 3.9 Proportion of national health research  focused on mental health across  income groups Source:  WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]. A recent analysis of inequities in mental health  research funding shows that 99% of research  is funded by high-income countries, and most  research in mental health is done in high-income  countries, with less than 5% of research funding  going to LMICs (137). Where high-profile research  is done in LMICs, it is often led by researchers  from, or based in, high-income countries,  so reinforcing power asymmetries (138). About US$ 3.7 billion a year is spent globally  on mental health research worldwide – an  estimated 7% of global health research funding  (137). Overall, more than half (56%) of all global  funding for mental health research is spent on  of health research globally  focuses on mental health  4.6% Highincome Upper-middleincome Lowermidldle-income Lowincome Proportion of national research output 2.7% 3.9% 5.2% 8.0% 53 Chapter 3 World mental health today

basic research rather than clinical or applied  research (see Fig. 3.10). Moreover, some fields  of mental health are underfunded compared  with others. Most notably, suicide and self-harm,  which is the subject of the only explicit SDG  indicator on mental health, receives less than 1%  of the overall mental health research funding. FIG. 3.10 Most mental health research is focused on the basic end of the spectrum Source:  Woelbert et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 3.3.2 The governance gap Inadequate policies, plans and laws Well-defined policies, plans and laws provide  the basis for action on mental health. Assuming  they are appropriately and fully implemented,  they are the mainstay of good governance. In total, 146 countries (86% of WHO Member  States) reported having a mental health policy or  plan in place – either stand-alone or integrated  into general health policies or plans. Slightly  more than half (56%) of responding countries  reported updating their mental health plans  within the past two years. Around 90 countries  PROPORTION OF MENTAL HEALTH RESEARCH BASIC RESEARCH APPLIED RESEARCH Underpinning Aetiology Prevention Detection, screening and diagnosis    Treatment development  21.2% 34.8% 7.1% 5.4% 4.6% 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% Treatment evaluation  12.1% Disease management  7.2% Health services  7.6% US$ 2075m US$ 998m US$ 633m 54 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

(fewer than half of WHO Member States) had a  plan specifically for children and adolescents.  A third of these had not been updated since 2017. But simply having a plan in place is not enough  to meet mental health care needs: plans need  to comply with human rights instruments,  be fully resourced and implemented, and  regularly monitored and evaluated. Only half (51%) of WHO Member States reported that  their mental health policies or plans fully complied  with human rights instruments. About a third (31%)  reported plans that were being implemented. And  only 21% of WHO Member States reported policies  or plans that were being implemented and fully  compliant with human rights instruments. This  proportion varied significantly across income groups,  from 32% for upper-middle-income countries to  just 3% for low-income countries (see Fig. 3.11). Few countries monitored the implementation of  their mental health policies or plans effectively.  Only 23% of responding countries reported using  indicators or targets to monitor most or all the  components of their mental health plan. A third of  responding countries reported using indicators to  monitor some components of their plan. Nearly  a quarter reported having no indicators at all. FIG. 3.11  The state of national mental health policies and plans grouped according to  countries’ income  Source:  WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]. A similar pattern is seen in mental health legislation:  80% of WHO Member States reported having a  stand-alone or integrated law for mental health;  but only 38% reported that their laws were fully  compliant with human rights instruments; and  only 28% reported having fully compliant laws  that were in the process of implementation.  Again, there was a wide gap between income  groups, with 40% of high-income WHO Member  States having a fully compliant law in the  process of implementation, compared with  just 3% of low-income WHO Member States. For both policies and legislation, people  with mental health conditions remain  Countries with a  policy or plan Countries that report a fully compliant  policy or plan Countries that report implementing a  fully compliant  policy or  plan GLOBAL HIGH-INCOME UPPERMIDDLE-INCOME LOWERMIDDLE-INCOME LOW-INCOME 83% 78% 89% 87% 86% 45% 45% 50% 60% 51% 3% 14% 32% 25% 21% 55 Chapter 3 World mental health today

poorly represented in decision-making and  development processes of most countries,  as well as in the accountability mechanisms  that monitor, evaluate and report compliance  with human rights instruments (139). Disparities and misplaced priorities Within broader health policies and plans, most  LMICs give low priority to mental health compared  with other burdensome health conditions  such as communicable and noncommunicable  diseases. Mental health resources are also  unfairly distributed across countries, regions and  communities. So populations with high rates  of socioeconomic deprivation end up having  the lowest access to care (140). Urban areas  tend to be better resourced than rural ones. Adult mental health services are typically  prioritized over services for children or older  adults, leading to less available or appropriate  care for these groups. Targeted services are  also deficient for many marginalized groups  such as indigenous peoples, ethnic and sexual  minorities, homeless people, refugees, and  migrants. Importantly, it is not only people  in low-income countries that receive less  accessible and poorer quality care, but also less  privileged groups within all countries (141).  Across all population groups, providing beds and  treatment in institutions is consistently prioritized  over making services available in the community.  Across both staff and budgets, most resources  available for mental health end up concentrated  in psychiatric hospitals, especially in LMICs.  More than 70% of mental health expenditure in  middle-income countries (compared with 35% in  high-income countries) goes towards psychiatric  hospitals, which largely cater for people with  severe mental health conditions (5). In low-income  countries psychiatric hospitals use up similarly  large, if not larger, proportions of the mental health  budget. Overall, stand-alone inpatient psychiatric  hospitals account for two out of every three  dollars (66%) spent globally by governments  on mental health (5). This is an inefficient  way of using resources for mental health. In 2019, most of the reporting countries (67%)  spent less than 20% of their mental health budget  on community mental health services. Around 80%  of countries spent less than 20% on mental health  in general hospitals and similarly 80% of countries  spent less than 20% on mental health in primary  care. Expenditures on prevention and promotion  programmes were even less common (5).  International funders similarly side-line mental  health, giving it only a fraction of the funding that  other health conditions receive and often focusing  on short-term projects rather than supporting  design and delivery of long-term mental health  systems. While health budget allocation should  never be based on burden alone, burden is a  factor to be considered when setting priorities  for health interventions. From 2006 to 2016, just  0.3% of global development assistance for health  went to mental health (142). In comparison, the  control of sexually-transmitted infections (STIs),  including HIV/AIDS, received almost 50% of  global development assistance for health in the  same timeframe – even though the burden in  DALYs attributed to mental disorders was more  than three times as great as that of STIs (143).  3.3.3 The resources gap The limited implementation of mental health  plans, policies and legislation is, in part, due  to a lack of resources – both human and  Most countries spent  less than 20%  of their mental health  budget on community  mental health services. 56 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

financial – available for mental health. The Mental health atlas 2020 shows that only  half of countries with a mental health policy or  plan have also estimated the financial resources  they need to implement it (60% include an  estimate of human resources required). And  only around a third of countries have actually  allocated financial and human resources to  implement their mental health policy or plan. The gap between estimating resources and  allocating them is particularly stark among  low-income countries. For example, while 40%  of these countries have estimated the funding  they need, only 8% have actually allocated  the requisite resources (see Fig. 3.12). FIG. 3.12  The gap between estimating and allocating resources to implement mental  health plans Source:  WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED].  Scant spending Mental health spending includes activities  delivered at all levels of care as well as programme  costs, such as administration, training and  supervision, and promotion and prevention  activities. Calculating the full level of mental  health spending in many countries is difficult  because of the range of services, service  providers and funding sources involved. In many cases, even calculating government  spending can be hard. Budgets for general health  care tend to allocate funds to generic categories  such as hospitals or primary health care, rather  than to specific health conditions (such as  depression). All health conditions treated at that  level or facility are then funded from the generic  allocation. The budget may further be broken  down into allocations for medicines, personnel  and equipment for instance; but it will rarely  describe funds specifically for mental health care. % responding countries Highincome Upper-middleincome Lowermiddle-income Lowincome 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% Highincome Upper-middleincome Lowermiddle-income Lowincome % countries that allocated the required human resources % countries that estimated needed human resources  % countries that allocated the required financial resources % countries that estimated needed financial resources 68% 40% 8% 27% 43% 43% 43% 64% 53% 55% 67% 51% 33% 49% 36% 29% 57 Chapter 3 World mental health today

Even so, most (but not all) countries dedicate  only a small fraction of their health care budgets  to mental health; and their spending is disproportionately low to their needs. Although a few  high-income countries spend up to or more than  10%, the Mental health atlas 2020 shows that the  median allocation of government health budgets  around the world to mental health amounts to  just 2%.1 In LMICs this figure drops to just 1%. The need for investments into mental health  promotion, protection and care are not limited to  the health sector. Supporting social integration  for people living with mental health conditions  requires action across social services, education,  labour and justice. Investments by these  sectors into mental health tends to be even  less than those made by the health sector. Scarce workforce for mental health In addition to scant spending, many countries  face huge scarcities of personnel trained for  dealing with mental health. This includes  shortages in mental health nurses, psychiatric  social workers, psychiatrists, psychologists,  counsellors and other paid mental health workers. Around half the world’s population lives in  countries where there is just one psychiatrist  to serve [PHONE_REDACTED]or more people. Other mental  health care providers who are trained to use  psychosocial interventions are even scarcer  (5). In low-income countries there are fewer  than one mental health worker of any kind per  1 This figure should be interpreted with caution as only 67 countries reported data on government spending to the  Mental health atlas [PHONE_REDACTED]. [PHONE_REDACTED]population, compared with more than  60 in high-income countries (see Fig. 3.13; the  median across all countries is 13 mental health  workers per [PHONE_REDACTED]population). Across all  income groups, most mental health workers  are nurses, who combined make up 44% of  the global workforce for mental health. Across all income groups, there is a great  shortage of specialized mental health workers  for children and adolescents, with just three  mental health workers of any kind per [PHONE_REDACTED]population, and a median rate as low as 0.01 per  [PHONE_REDACTED]population in low-income countries. In  these countries, the mental health workforce for  children and adolescents is almost non-existent. In LMICs, the mental health  workforce for children and  adolescents is almost non-existent. The scarcities in skills are compounded because  few non-specialist doctors, nurses, and clinical  officers have been trained to recognize and  treat patients with mental health conditions  in primary health care. In 2020, the number of  countries reporting that primary health care  workers receive training on how to manage  mental health conditions is high (146 or 88% of  countries) (5). This would seem to indicate an  appetite for task-sharing to increase the pool of  workers available for mental health care. But still  most countries have nowhere near the level of  trained and skilled personnel required to provide  for everyone in need, with only 25% of WHO  Member States reporting that they had integrated  mental health into primary care (see section  3.3.4 The services gap). This means that, beyond  task-sharing, other solutions can and must be  rapidly scaled up, including e-health solutions,  even though the digital divide remains a further  barrier to health service access and socioeconomic  development more broadly (see A digital divide). Governments around the  world allocate just 2%  of their health budgets  to the treatment and  prevention of mental   health conditions. 58 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

FIG. 3.13 The specialized mental health workforce across country income groups   Source:  WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]. Lack of essential medicines Another aspect of the resources gap is the  limited availability of essential psychotropic  medicines, especially in LMICs. And when they  are available, far more people in LMICs also end  up paying for these medicines out of pocket (5). A recent review of 112 national essential  medicines lists – commissioned for this  report – found inequities in the listing,  availability, pricing and affordability of essential  psychotropic medicines in countries (144). The review showed that up to 40% of low-income  countries did not include essential medicines  that have been on the WHO Model list for essential  medicines for decades, such as long-acting  (depot) fluphenazine for schizophrenia  and lithium carbonate mood stabilizer for  bipolar disorder. Other supply gaps may be  behind some of these omissions, for example  laboratory tests are needed to monitor use of  some medicines, to avoid inappropriate use or  serious side effects (read Eleni’s experience). Median number per [PHONE_REDACTED]population High-income Upper-middle-income Lower-middle-income Low-income [PHONE_REDACTED] Global  workforce  composition [PHONE_REDACTED]Other specialized workers Social workers Psychologists Mental health nurses Psychiatrists                        59 Chapter 3 World mental health today

The review also showed that some  second-generation antipsychotics on the  model list for schizophrenia (risperidone  and clozapine) were only included in 35%  and 25% of national essential medicines lists  in low-income countries respectively. The actual availability of different essential  psychotropic medicines was lower in the public  sector compared with the private sector, and  well below 50% worldwide, often much lower  in low-income countries where there is a high  incidence of stock-outs. The antidepressant  medicines amitriptyline and fluoxetine in the  public sector in low-income countries were three  times more expensive than the international  unit reference price. Overall, the review found  that essential psychotropic medicines were less  affordable to people in low-income countries  compared with people in other countries (144). A digital divide Whether through electronic systems or mobile  applications, digital technologies are becoming  a standard part of mental health care around  the world (see Chapter 5, In focus: Harnessing  digital technologies for mental health). They can  be key to scaling up access to care for common  mental health conditions such as depression  or anxiety and can also provide a platform for  providing remote care, as during the COVID-19  pandemic when face-to-face options were  shut down as part of social restrictions. But relying on digital technologies to deliver  mental health services risks excluding some of the  world’s most vulnerable people from accessing  the care they need and fails to address the full  spectrum of mental health conditions that people  experience. For many people in LMICs, mobile  phones offer the only way of connecting to the  internet and accessing valuable information  and resources that would otherwise be out of  reach. Access to mobile phones has grown exponentially in recent years, with mobile networks  now covering more than 85% of the population  in every region of the world (145). But even  where networks are available, not everyone  has a smart phone, and even for those who do,  internet access can be prohibitively expensive. Indeed, the figures for mobile network coverage  only tell half the story: analysis from 2019 showed  that around half the world’s population had no  internet connection, with big disparities between  and within countries (145). Just 20% of households  in low-income countries were connected to the  internet in 2019, compared with 87% of people  in developed ones (145). In sub-Saharan Africa,  4G or newer wireless systems remained largely  unavailable. Across all regions, but especially in  sub-Saharan Africa, people living in rural areas  were half as likely to be connected to the internet  as those living in urban areas; and women were  less likely to use the internet than men. In all  regions, internet access was more prevalent  among young people (15–24 years of age). Surveys in high-income countries further suggest  that people living with mental health conditions  face a heightened risk of digital exclusion,  because of material deprivation and diminished  opportunities to use or be trained in information  technology or the internet, including people  residing in long-term care facilities (146). All these disparities add up to a digital  divide that compounds existing inequities  in access to mental health services. Even if connectivity to the internet improves,  many countries still need to step up their  investment in mental health information systems,  service user empowerment and workforce  development to make the move from analogue  to digital care provision a reality for all. 60 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

NARRATIVE Living in a low-income country  means facing disabling barriers to  quality care Eleni’s experience I struggle with bipolar disorder in Ethiopia, a  low-income country. This means facing disabling  barriers to access mental health care of minimum  standards. Medication supplies are scarce, irregular and  expensive. Being a poor country comes with lack  of hard currency to import such medications  sustainably. More than often, I had to switch from  a medication that enabled me live a stable life to  a sub-optimal one because of unavailability in  the market. Isn’t it sad to report that many of my  mood episodes were actually triggered by these  involuntary changes in medication? Even when the medicines are available, the  prescribed dosage may not be. I remember I was  prescribed a mood stabilizer with 25mg but only  100mg was available in the market. This left me with  no other choice than having to split the tablet in 4  parts with a kitchen knife. Most of the time, half of  the tablet will turn to powder as it does not have  built-in breakable splits. Not only medication but also laboratory tests are  more than often unavailable to monitor therapeutic  ranges. I was put on a mood stabilizer that required  regular blood tests. I will never forget the toxic  reactions I suffered because my blood level could  not be monitored. Chemicals for those blood tests  could not be imported at the time. I have always covered my mental health  treatment costs myself. I am privileged to have a  middle-income family. But this imposed a heavy  burden on our income. Health insurance schemes  are not set. Sometimes, I would buy medications on  the black market. They were very expensive but that  was the price for a stable functional life. Eleni Misganaw, Ethiopia 61 Chapter 3 World mental health today

3.3.4 The services gap Poor treatment coverage With nearly a billion people in the world living  with a mental disorder, the need for adequate  and accessible services is evident. But all  over the globe, mental health systems are  failing to meet their populations’ needs. The gap between prevalence and treatment  remains unacceptably large. Researchers suggest  that all over the world a large proportion of people  with mental health conditions  go completely  untreated, receiving no formal care at all. For  example, WHO estimates that only 29% of people  with psychosis receive mental health services (5). The gaps in treatment vary across countries and  from one mental disorder to another. For example,  while 70% of people with psychosis are reported  to be treated in high-income countries, only 12%  of people with psychosis receive mental health  care in low-income countries (5). For depression,  the gaps in service coverage are wide across  all countries: even in high-income countries,  only one third of people with major depressive  disorders receive formal mental health care (147). Variable quality and range of services  available In all countries, gaps in service coverage are  compounded by variability in quality of care.  Quality includes how well mental health care  aligns with human rights principles, whether  or not treatment meets any defined minimum  standards for adequacy, and to what extent  mental health care supports social inclusion.  Though difficult to quantify, mental health  care does not align with human rights  principles throughout the world (22). Abuses  and substandard living conditions in many  psychiatric hospitals are especially notorious  and widespread (read Mrs BN’s experience and  see section 4.2.2 The right to quality care).  Among those people with mental health  conditions who are treated, only a small  proportion receive care that meets minimum  standards for adequacy. A recent systematic  review of treatment coverage for major depressive  disorder found that minimally-adequate treatment  ranged from 23% in high-income countries to 3%  in low- and lower-middle-income countries (147). Often the range of interventions available  is severely limited, with few alternatives to  biomedical-based care available. In 2020, WHO  Member States reported that pharmacological  interventions were much more widely available  than psychosocial interventions (5). The gap is  particularly in high-income countries, where  71% countries report providing pharmacological interventions at primary care facilities  but only 34% provide psychosocial interventions there. In LMICs, the gap in availability  between different types of intervention is  much smaller, but that is because neither type  is widely provided in primary health care. In many countries mental health care systems  also fail to provide the full range of social  support that people living with mental health  conditions can require. In 2020, nearly all (96%)  high-income countries reported providing  social care and income support to people with  mental health conditions, compared with 21% of  low-income countries providing income support  and 38% providing social care support (5).  Other types of critical social support – including  housing, employment, education and legal  support – are scarce almost everywhere. Fewer  than 45% of countries worldwide reported  providing any of these types of support; and  only 24% reported providing all of them.  Housing was the least available form of  support globally (36%), but especially so in  low-income countries (4%), where employment  and education support were similarly rare. 62 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

NARRATIVE I am writing to you with a last hope Mrs BN’s experience A few years ago my son, a student, fell ill and was  admitted to the sanatorium of […], which I would  say has been forgotten by the world and God. The  conditions there are miserable. As soon as I entered  I was overwhelmed by a nightmarish atmosphere:  dirty patients, dishevelled and very very skinny,  surrounded me asking for some bread. As for the  building, it is pitiful to look at: many broken windows,  walls that haven’t been painted for many years and  toilets totally out of order. There is not even one bed per patient so people  have to sleep on mattresses on the floor. There is no  running water and most of the cooking is done using  rainwater. The worst is the food. I go there every week  and see pigs’ feet or heads on the inmates’ plates. On  several occasions I have seen mouldy margarine be  served and rotten meat given to the cooks to prepare.  I cannot find an explanation for why a normal man  treats other people with such a lack of respect, like  animals. Actually, worse than animals, since the  many dogs in the yard of the sanatorium are fed with  lean, fresh meat (I’ve seen it myself). These dogs are  allowed to run after and bite the inmates, making  them so scared they won’t leave the buildings to walk  in the yard. Some of the patients are exploited by the staff, either  to work at their own homes or to do outdoor chores  under the scorching sun. Patients are beaten or  stuffed with sedatives and do not leave their beds. Through several conversations and letters I have  tried to improve the lives of those poor inmates,  whose lives have already been stricken enough by  their destiny and do not need to made worse by  other men. Someone has even answered me: “Why  are you fighting that much? This place is but the  waste of society.” This is why I am writing to you with a last hope.   Extract from a letter to WHO. 63 Chapter 3 World mental health today

3.4 Barriers to demand for care In part, the extremely high unmet need for mental  health care, even among people with severe  mental health conditions, is due to a lack of  demand for, or uptake of, services. This reluctance  or inability to seek help can be explained by a  variety of factors, from high cost, poor quality  and limited accessibility, through to lack of  knowledge about mental health, stigma and  poor previous experiences with seeking help. The sections that follow summarize some of the  biggest barriers to demand for care worldwide. 3.4.1 Poor supply There is a close relationship between demand  and supply of mental health care. Each of the  gaps described previously (gaps in information,  governance, resources and services) compromise  the supply of appropriate, good quality mental  health care. Yet, the lack of quality mental health  services available, especially at the primary and  secondary levels of care, in turn suppresses demand. In many places, formal mental health services  simply do not exist. Even when they are available,  they are often inaccessible. Concerns about  location, cost, treatment and confidentiality  can all drive up reluctance to seek help. Locating services appropriately is key. In  LMICs many mental health services are disproportionately concentrated in psychiatric  hospitals in or near major cities. This means that  rural populations often cannot or choose not to  use them: the journey may be too expensive; the  transportation systems may be too unreliable;  and the time required may be too much. Even for those living near mental health services,  the cost of treatment can prove a major barrier  to demand for mental health care. Two-thirds of  low-income countries reporting to WHO in 2020  did not include mental health care in national  health insurance schemes (5). This means that  people in need have to fund their care themselves,  often spending significant and potentially  impoverishing sums out of pocket. Research in  Ethiopia, India, Nepal and Nigeria shows that  spending money on mental health care significantly increases the likelihood of a household  outspending its resources, which can lead to  debt and poverty (148). One study in Goa, India,  showed that depressed women were three times  more likely than other women to spend more  than half their monthly household expenditure  on out-of-pocket health care costs (149). Weak or low-quality care systems pose another  barrier to demand. Negative past experiences  with mental health services, distrust of health  professionals and treatment and unwillingness  to disclose mental health problems can all play  a big part in preventing help-seeking. Many  people, faced with the option of no care versus  contacting services that may offer little help,  may not be confidential, or may stigmatize or  even mistreat them, choose to go untreated. 3.4.2 Low levels of health  literacy about mental health Low demand for mental health care can also  be driven by low levels of health literacy  Two-thirds   of low-income countries  did not include mental  health in national health  insurance schemes. 65 Chapter 3 World mental health today

about mental health, including a lack of  knowledge and understanding of mental health  as well as prevailing beliefs and attitudes  that undermine the value placed on mental  health and effective mental health care. When it comes to physical health, it is widely  accepted that people need to appreciate and look  after their own health, and that governments  can help to inform and support people, for  example by promoting physical activity, healthy  diets and no tobacco and alcohol use. This  approach is just as important for mental health. A recent global survey by the Wellcome Trust  found that most people around the world  believe mental health is as or more important  than physical health (150). Yet the idea that  mental health is something everyone needs  to understand and nurture is not part of the  common public discourse in most communities. The reality is that most people may not have  access to evidence-based information on  opportunities that can promote their mental  health. Meanwhile, pervasive negative  attitudes continue to devalue and perpetuate  discrimination against and abuse of people  living with mental health conditions. The above mentioned global survey shows  that people are not sure science can help in  addressing mental health issues (150). In many  cases, people do not recognize their own need  for treatment (read Steven’s experience). Caregivers may not have access to tailored  information to recognize mental health  conditions in their children, especially when  these manifest as stomachaches, headaches,  irritability, frustration, anger, rapid mood  changes and emotional outbursts, and  destructive or challenging behaviour. General  health care providers can also often miss these  symptoms of mental health problems (151). Differences in beliefs across cultures influence  help-seeking outside the formal health  system, for example through traditional or  complementary medicine or self-reliance  (152). All societies probably have terms and  concepts to describe people with mental  health conditions, but ideas about how or  why these conditions arise vary markedly. Similarly, the need to provide dedicated support  for people with severe mental health conditions  is widely acknowledged, but ideas about what  that support should look like may not match  prevailing evidence-based treatments. For  example, in many cultural contexts, common  mental health conditions such as depression and  anxiety are not regarded as health conditions  that can be helped through the formal health  care system. Rather, these conditions are  often expected to improve through social  and emotional support from relatives or  through religious, traditional or alternative  and complementary healing methods (153). 3.4.3 Stigma One of the biggest barriers to demand for mental  health care is the stigma associated with mental  health conditions. All over the world, people living  with mental health conditions are the subject  of deep-rooted stigma and discrimination. All over the world, people living  with mental health conditions  are the subject of deep-rooted  stigma and discrimination. Society in general has stereotyped views about  mental health conditions and how they affect  people. People with mental health conditions are  commonly assumed to be lazy, weak, unintelligent  or difficult (154). They are also often believed to be  violent and dangerous, when in fact they are more  at risk of being attacked or harming themselves  than harming other people (155). Women with  66 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

NARRATIVE severe mental health conditions are particularly  at risk of sexual violence. Violence against people  with mental health conditions can be deadly. In many communities, mental health conditions  are not considered to be health issues, but are  seen as a weakness of character, a punishment  for immoral behaviour or the result of illicit  drug taking or supernatural forces. In all cases,  the media can exacerbate misconceptions  by portraying people with mental health  conditions as dangerous, irresponsible or  incapable of making rational decisions (156). You can achieve anything Steven’s experience  My chronic anxiety started around 15 years ago, when I  was studying for my law degree. I put a lot of pressure  on myself to be a high achiever and set the bar so high  it was at times unachievable. I had low self-worth. My anxiety got so bad it was hard to get out of bed  some days. It stayed with me as I trained to become  a lawyer. I couldn’t tell management of my mental  health struggles. I felt that I would be perceived as  “weak” and “not able to do my job” and I felt I’d lose  the respect of my colleagues. I didn’t want to go to work anymore. I felt I was  changing, becoming someone I didn’t recognize or like.  I tried to discuss it with my family but couldn’t express  how I was feeling in words. It still hurts today when I cast  my mind back to this difficult period of my life. Then I had a lightbulb moment. I reached out for  support from a psychologist. It was a breath of fresh air.  For the first time I felt somebody understood and didn’t  judge me. This lifted a huge weight off my shoulders. The psychologist showed me how I could break  things down which allowed me to cope better and not  become so overwhelmed with life. I have used this  advice in every aspect of my life, even today, running  my own company promoting mental health awareness  within business and law firms. I still suffer with my anxiety and feelings of low  self-worth. But I have learned to manage them and  I am in a happy place with a good mindset. I have  also been successful in what I do, which I believe is  because I have lived experience and can relate to the  needs of my clients. I would like to advise anyone reading this to not let  your mental health struggles define who you are. Do  not feel pressured to perform or rush things: you are  on your own path and you will achieve your dreams  and goals in your own time. Steven Lawlor, United Kingdom 67 Chapter 3 World mental health today

NARRATIVE Stigma stifled my recovery Odireleng’s experience For the longest time I was afraid of speaking about  my battle with mental health because of the  stigma attached to it. My healing only began when I  overcame the stigma and realized there is no shame  in asking for help. When I was diagnosed in 2014, I was very afraid, lonely  and didn’t believe that healing was possible. The  single-sided story of bipolar illness that was narrated  in my community focused only on the struggles it  caused, rather than how to overcome them. Even after diagnosis, I had a very difficult time and  low self-esteem. But I remained hopeful and I made  a pledge to myself to use the lessons I’d learned to  help others. As part of my recovery I became a mental  health advocate. I am passionate about encouraging people to begin  their healing by overcoming stigma and speaking up  openly about their mental health condition. I strongly  believe that it is possible to overcome the barrier of  stigma and receive mental health care that enables  you to lead a prosperous life. Odireleng Kasale, Botswana The result is that people living with mental health  conditions are often treated with fear, shame and  contempt. For example, one survey in south-west  Nigeria found that 97% of people believed people  with mental health conditions were dangerous,  83% of people were afraid to talk to someone with  a mental health condition and only 17% of people  would consider marrying someone with a mental  health condition (157). In many cases, people  with mental health conditions are also subject  to human rights violations including isolation,  incarceration and ill-treatment (see section 4.2  Promoting and protecting human rights). The stigma attached to mental health conditions is  universal, pervading across cultures and contexts  in countries everywhere. People living with mental  health conditions can experience stigma from  families, neighbours, and from health professionals themselves (158). In some cases, they can  internalize negative messages and stereotypes  and apply them to themselves in what is known as  self-stigma. In many countries stigma extends to  working in mental health care and can contribute  to staff shortages in mental health systems (158). People will often choose to suffer mental distress  without relief, rather than risk the discrimination  and ostracization that comes with accessing  mental health services (read Odireleng’s  experience). Yet with the right support, most  people with severe mental health conditions  can function at a very high social and economic  level, maintaining excellent relationships  and functioning well in employment. 68 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

4 Benefits   of change PUBLIC HEALTH  HUMAN RIGHTS  SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Chapter summary In this chapter we make the case for investment in mental health,  explaining how transforming mental health care provides a platform for  advancing public health and well-being, protecting human rights and  promoting social and economic development. This chapter showcases  the benefits of change for individuals, families, communities and  economies. And it makes clear how committing to mental health is an  investment into a better life and future for all. Key messages from this chapter are: Investing in mental health can greatly reduce  suffering and advance public health. Transformation in mental health is needed  to stop human rights violations that people  with mental health conditions experience. Improving people’s mental health  improves educational outcomes and  participation in the workforce, boosts  productivity and strengthens social  functioning to the benefit of all. Investing in mental health means investing  in strategies to: ensure access to effective,  quality, affordable mental health care for  all; tackle stigma, discrimination and abuse;  and address underlying social and economic  realities that shape people’s mental health. There is a core set of cost–effective interventions for priority mental health interventions  that are feasible, affordable and appropriate. 70 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

The huge challenge posed by mental health  conditions today calls for a transformation.  Rising interest in mental health over several  decades has built international consensus  for change and has created multiple options  and opportunities for action, as described in  the Comprehensive mental health action plan  2013–[PHONE_REDACTED]. Most recently, the COVID-19  pandemic put the value and vulnerability of mental  health under the spotlight and exposed huge gaps  in mental health systems and structures all over  the world (see Chapter 2, In focus: COVID-19 and  mental health). More policy-makers than ever  understand the imperative for improvement and  the appetite for change has never been greater. As this chapter shows, the evidence available  today makes a compelling case for change.  The inextricable links between mental  health and public health, human rights and  socioeconomic development mean that  transforming policy and practice in mental  health can deliver real, substantive benefits  for individuals, communities and countries  everywhere. Investment into mental health is an  investment into a better life and future for all. 4.1 Advancing public health 4.1.1 Reduced suffering and  improved mental health and  well-being Investment and transformation in mental  health is needed because good mental health  is fundamental to any individual’s health  and well-being, including their capacity to  live a fulfilling life. Conversely, experiencing  a mental health condition is associated with  mental suffering and, for too many people,  social exclusion (read Zineb’s experience). Mental disorders affect one in eight people around  the world and exact a high toll on public health  (see Chapter 3 World mental health today). In  2019, they were the largest contributor to global  non-fatal disease burden (measured as years  lived with disability YLDs). People experiencing a  mental health condition are a vastly underserved  group. As such, their capacity to cope, connect,  function and thrive is compromised; and they  face a far greater risk of suicide and physical  illness. People living with severe mental health  conditions die 10–20 years earlier than the general  population, most often through unrecognized  and untreated physical health conditions. Investing in mental health can greatly reduce  suffering and improve the quality of life, social  functioning and life expectancy of people  with mental health conditions. It can both  close the vast care gap that exists for mental  health conditions and move significantly  closer towards universal health coverage. There is now more-than-adequate  evidence upon which to  act and invest, no matter  the resource context. For decades, doubt has been cast on mental  health interventions’ effectiveness and on  their collective ability to reduce public health  burden, especially in LMICs. But there is now  more-than-adequate evidence upon which to act  and invest, no matter the resource context (15,  159). For example, a modelling study focused  on low-income countries showed that investing  71 Chapter 4 Benefits of change

NARRATIVE We no longer have the capacity to bear  Zineb’s experience  I am the mother of Mohammed, 27, who has had  schizophrenia for ten years, and his big brother  Younes, may God rest his soul, who was suffering  from the same. In 2015, Younes’ condition deteriorated and he died.  Mohammed was deeply affected by his brother’s  death and since then has also severely deteriorated.  There has been constant delirium, non-acceptance  of treatment and severe violence towards us. We felt  forced to leave our house for him and we bought a  simple apartment to shelter from his violence. We feel  guilty that we left him alone, but we had to. Mohammed has repeatedly tried to end his life and it  nearly happened. His condition is getting worse day by  day. We no longer have the capacity to bear. We feel psychologically and physically destroyed.  We and those like us are in dire need of assistance  and facilities to save our children. We have endured  the complexities of administrative procedures and  expenses to no avail. There is no place in the public  hospital, and the expenses of the private hospital are  extremely high and we have no energy anymore. I know Mohammed loves me so much but I live in fear  of him. And now he has become depressed and lives in  isolation and cannot face people. Civil society is trying to help as much as possible. I have  begun a training programme aimed at increasing the  capacity of families to cope with a family member’s  illness, but my situation makes me unable to focus and  absorb information. A solution must be found for people to enjoy their right  to care and rehabilitation so they can be part of society.  This requires concerted efforts between relevant  sectors and stakeholders. It is necessary and urgent. Zineb, Morocco just US$ 1 per capita annually in a package  of evidence-based care for priority mental  health conditions could reduce YLDs by close  to 5 000 per million population each year (160).  For a more scaled-up package of care costing  US$ 2 per capita, the burden of mental health  conditions is reduced by [PHONE_REDACTED]YLDs per million  population. So, for a country with 50 million  inhabitants, this modest annual investment  of US$ 1–2 per capita cuts [PHONE_REDACTED]to [PHONE_REDACTED]years-worth of disability across the population. Promote, protect, restore In part, public health is about promoting and  protecting mental and physical health by  identifying the underlying factors that influence  health – the individual, social and structural  72 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

determinants – and intervening to enhance  protective factors or reduce risks. This public  health function includes a wide range of activities  that can be targeted at individuals, groups of  vulnerable people or whole populations. Interventions where the evidence and  experience of mental health benefits  are particularly compelling include: •	 suicide prevention strategies; •	 positive parenting and preschool education and  enrichment programmes; •	 school-based social and emotional learning  programmes; and •	 mental health promotion and protection in work  settings. For more information on, and real-world examples  of, evidence-based strategies for promoting  and protecting mental health see Chapter 6  Promotion and prevention for change. For people experiencing mental health conditions,  promotion and prevention is not enough and  access to quality interventions to improve or  restore mental health is essential. A range of  effective and evidence-based interventions exist,  yet they are unavailable to most people around  the world who could benefit from them. This  massive gap between the need for and uptake of  care was the primary motivation behind WHO’s  Mental Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP).  The programme seeks to significantly expand  coverage of evidence-based interventions for  a range of priority conditions, with a focus on  primary health care and other non-specialized  health care settings in LMICs (161). Providing essential care for everyone who needs  it means not just integrating mental health care  into primary health care. It also requires the  development, strengthening or reorganization of  mental health services to ensure a range of other  community-based mental health care options  are available, including acute inpatient care at  general hospitals or community mental health  centers or teams. And it involves supporting  a comprehensive set of interventions beyond  the health sector, alongside scaling down and  closing long-stay psychiatric institutions while  ensuring support in the community for discharged  residents. For more information on what that  restructure looks like in practice see Chapter 7  Restructuring and scaling up care for impact. Working with other relevant sectors is especially  important because clinical practice is just one part  of the mental health care puzzle. For many people  living with mental health conditions, recovery  requires access to a broader programme of support  that includes a range of activities specifically  aimed at supporting social inclusion, including  support in maintaining independence, making  social connections, participating in community  activities, managing complex relationships, and  accessing supported housing, work or education. All  these services and supports across sectors should  protect and promote human rights (see section  4.2 Promoting and protecting human rights) (23). 4.1.2 Improved physical  health The intimate links between mental health  conditions and physical health mean that  investing in mental health does not only reduce  massive population suffering but can also  deliver widespread physical health benefits. Many of the factors that influence mental health  also influence other health conditions such as  those related to reproductive and maternal  health as well as chronic physical diseases,  including NCDs such as cardiovascular diseases,  diabetes, cancer and respiratory diseases;  communicable diseases such as HIV/AIDS,  and neglected tropical diseases (NTDs) such  as leprosy and cutaneous leishmaniasis. 73 Chapter 4 Benefits of change

The four greatest risk factors for NCDs – tobacco  use, unhealthy diets, physical inactivity and  harmful use of alcohol – are all linked with  various mental health conditions (162). Childhood  adversity, which is a major risk factor for later-life  mental health conditions, is similarly related  to a range of adult-onset NCDs, including  heart disease, diabetes and asthma (163). Mental health conditions affect and are affected  by chronic physical diseases (see Table 4.1). They  can be precursors of one another, consequences,  or the result of interactive effects. For example,  people with depression or anxiety experience  adverse changes in endocrine and immune  functioning that increases their susceptibility  to a range of chronic diseases. They are also  more likely to engage in risk behaviours such  as smoking and substance use. Conversely,  people with chronic diseases are put under  physical and psychological stress that can trigger  the onset of depression or anxiety (163). Links between some chronic diseases (including  both HIV/AIDS and several NTDs) and brain  health have also been found, leading to  neurological consequences that can result  in significant illness and death (164, 165). 74 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

TABLE 4.1 Evidence on the bidirectional links between mental health conditions and  physical diseases Chronic disease Bidirectional links to mental health Noncommunicable  diseases  •	 People living with heart disease are more than twice as likely to also have  depression or anxiety than other people. •	 Diabetes is significantly linked with depression, intermittent explosive disorder,  binge eating disorder and bulimia nervosa. •	 Depression is particularly prevalent in people with cancer. •	 There is a strong connection between stroke and depression in both directions. •	 People with common mental health conditions have an excess mortality  of 8–12% through smoking, diabetes, history of myocardial infarction and  hypertension. HIV/AIDS  •	 Mental health conditions are more prevalent among people living with HIV/AIDS  than among the general population. •	 Women living with HIV experience higher rates of depression, anxiety and PTSD  symptoms than either men living with HIV or women who are HIV negative. •	 Exposure to abuse at home increases the likelihood of adolescent mental  health conditions, which in turn can make it difficult for adolescents to protect  themselves from HIV risk. •	 Treating depression can improve adherence to care and clinical outcomes for  people living with HIV/AIDS. Tuberculosis  •	 Depression and anxiety are more prevalent among people with tuberculosis  than among the general population. •	 Untreated depression and psychological distress in people with tuberculosis  are associated with worse clinical outcomes, poorer quality of life and greater  disability. •	 Depression is significantly linked to non-adherence to tuberculosis treatment. •	 Medicines for tuberculosis can have negative impacts on mental health. Neglected Tropical  Diseases  •	 Cutaneous leishmaniasis, onchocerciasis and snakebite envenoming are all  linked to anxiety, depression and psychological distress. •	 One in two people with leprosy or lymphatic filariasis experiences depression or  anxiety.  •	 In people with lymphatic filariasis, depression has been estimated to almost  double the total burden of disease. Sources: Stein et al, [PHONE_REDACTED], WHO and UNAIDS (166); Fujiwara, [PHONE_REDACTED]; WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 75 Chapter 4 Benefits of change

The multiple links between mental health  conditions and other chronic diseases mean they  often co-occur. Children with long-term physical  health conditions are twice as likely to have an  emotional or behavioural condition than other  children; while adults with chronic diseases  are two to three times more likely to develop  depression than the rest of the population. People  with three or more physical health conditions are  seven times more likely to have depression (169). HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis (TB) are both similarly  associated with various mental health conditions.  People living with HIV are twice as likely to  experience severe depression compared with  other people (170). And a recent systematic  review shows that the risk of death by suicide is  100 times higher in people living with HIV than in  the general population (171). A study in Ethiopia  similarly showed that half of people with TB had  symptoms consistent with depression and that  this group of people – who were much more  likely to drop out of TB treatment – was half as  likely to be alive at a six months follow up (172). At a global level, comorbidity of mental and  physical health conditions has become the  rule rather than the exception, especially  in people over 60 years of age (173). Having both physical and mental health  conditions delays recovery from both.  Comorbidity makes the treatment of all  conditions more difficult, often resulting in  more complications. For example, people with  chronic diseases who are depressed may find  it harder to care for themselves, adhere to  treatment or to reach out for health or social  support when necessary. This leads to worse  health outcomes, more hospitalizations and  higher health care expenditures. For people living  with HIV/AIDS or TB, dropping out of treatment  also increases the risk of further transmission  and multidrug-resistant disease (173). It is clear that individuals cannot attain full  physical health without mental health. All  over the world, countries cannot achieve their  objectives for most priority diseases without  simultaneously investing in mental health. Integrated care is good care When people with comorbid conditions arrive  in health care, they are usually treated for one  or the other of their conditions but not both. As  a result, many conditions go unrecognized and  untreated in their early stages, increasing the risk  of disability and premature death (see section  3.1.2 Mortality). Indeed, the most common cause  of death among people with severe mental health  conditions is cardiovascular disease (174). An integrated approach to care  ensures mental and physical health  conditions are considered, managed  and monitored simultaneously. An integrated approach to care ensures mental and  physical health conditions are considered, managed  and monitored simultaneously. Implemented well,  it can improve accessibility, reduce fragmentation  and duplication of infrastructure and resources and  better meet people’s health needs and expectations. Integration can be implemented in many ways  and at different levels of the health system (175). •	 For service users, integrated care is about  having a person-centred approach that is  coordinated across diseases, settings and time. •	 For health care organizations, integrated care  is about having common information systems  and professional partnerships based on shared  roles and responsibilities, for example through  multidisciplinary teams, task sharing and links  to social care and community services. •	 For ministries of health, integrated care  is about having joint policies, financing  mechanisms and governance structures across  physical and mental health. 76 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

Integrating mental health services into primary  care is a key strategy at the level of health care  organizations (see section 7.2.1 Mental health  in primary care). Collaborative care models  in particular have been shown to improve  mental health outcomes, including in people  with comorbid NCDs (176, 177). A proven  approach is to use service delivery platforms  that already exist for chronic diseases as the  basis for expanding mental health services. For  example, specific platforms used to support HIV  care can be used as entry points for integrating  harm reduction services and care for people  living with mental health conditions (167). For more information on evidence-based  strategies for integrating mental and physical  health care across all health care platforms,  including primary care, general hospitals and  disease-specific health services, see Chapter 7  Restructuring and scaling up care for impact. 4.1.3 Greater equity of access Investment and transformation in mental health  are needed because mental health and mental  health care are marked by inequality. The  significant influence that structural factors can  have on mental health means that some groups  of people in society have far poorer mental  health than others. In many cases, those same  people also have less access to effective and  appropriate care because they are geographically distant from, or unable to pay for, services. Particularly in lower-income settings, this  means that a substantial proportion of people  with mental health conditions cannot access  the care they need. This can lead to worsening  mental health, with adverse consequences  on people’s abilities to work, learn or parent.  Often, people who access care have to pay for it  themselves because it is excluded from essential  packages of care and insurance schemes. Direct out-of-pocket spending is an unfair way of  paying for health care since poorer households  end up paying a proportionately greater amount  of their available income (by contrast, tax-based  health insurance typically requires higher  contributions from wealthier households). Cost  of care is known to be a major barrier to people  with mental health conditions seeking help (178). Private purchase is an  unfair and regressive way of  paying for health care. Out-of-pocket spending on mental health care  often pushes people to adopt undesirable  coping strategies – such as cutting household  spending, using up life savings, selling assets  or borrowing – which entrenches poverty and  intergenerational disadvantage and can lead  to poorer health outcomes (10). Importantly  it is not only the costs of treatment that puts  people at financial risk, but also transport  costs, loss of income for individuals and  their carers, and other indirect costs. Addressing inequalities as part of mental health  reform is essential to provide the right services  in the right ways and places to reach everyone  and anyone. Addressing people’s social needs, for  example through social work-type interventions,  is essential as part of, or alongside, mental  health care. In addition, it is crucial to address  the population-level structural determinants of  mental health that create social disadvantage  (see section 6.1.3 Building structural capital  for mental health). Other strategies focus on  scaling up access to care, including by enhancing  health coverage and financial protection. Mental health for all Including mental health conditions and interventions  in UHC basic packages of essential services is a  fundamental step towards closing the care gap. 77 Chapter 4 Benefits of change

Ultimately, interventions provided under UHC  should ensure that all essential mental health  needs are covered. This means they need to  be comprehensive, including evidence-based  psychosocial and pharmacological interventions, as  described in WHO’s UHC compendium (see section  5.1.3 Evidence to inform policy and practice) (179). Interventions provided under UHC  should ensure that all essential  mental health needs are covered. Universal public health policies that finance  interventions for all can also lead to a fairer  allocation of public health resources and benefit  the lowest-income groups most (see Box 4.1  Chile: including mental health conditions in  UHC). In this sense, enhanced health coverage  is important to protect people from the  potentially catastrophic cost of paying for  health services out of their own pockets. Enhanced coverage and increased financial  protection are essentially two sides of  the same equity coin. Improved coverage  without a corresponding rise in financial  protection will lead to inequitable rates of  service uptake and outcomes. But improved  financial protection without expanded  coverage will bring little improvement at all. 78 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

CASE STUDY BOX 4.1 Chile: including mental health conditions in UHC In 2005, as part of a broad process of health reform,  Chile introduced Acceso Universal con Garantías  Explícitas (GES), a universal health coverage package  of medical and psychosocial benefits. The package, which is periodically updated,  comprises a prioritized list of diagnoses and  treatments for 85 health conditions, including  depression, bipolar disorder, alcohol/drug  dependence, schizophrenia and dementia. GES  gives equal rights to both public and private sector  beneficiaries. It guarantees access to quality health  care through eligibility criteria, accreditation of  facilities, and professional certification. It also  ensures care is timely and affordable by setting  upper limits on waiting times and out-of-pocket  co-payments. Overall, GES has made the Chilean health system  more efficient by emphasizing health priorities.  Health services have become more accessible for  all, with coverage of the lowest income quintile  increasing by 20%. The proportion of people with  depression who die during or shortly after admission  to hospital has dropped. And, by integrating mental  health into all levels of the general health care, early  care for first-episode schizophrenia has improved. People using GES say it has increased access to  care, enabled diagnosis and treatment for the  underprivileged, and guaranteed financial protection. Consolidating community mental health services  across the country has been critical for GES.  Delivered through multisectoral teams, these services  provide prevention, treatment and rehabilitation for  people with severe mental health conditions. Most  users can access psychotropic medicines free of  charge. More than half also receive brief individual  psychological treatment. And almost all users receive  some other kind of individual, family or group  psychosocial intervention. These community mental health services are deeply  connected to primary health care with robust systems  for referral and counter referral. Every month,  members of the community mental health team visit  each primary care center in their catchment area to  discuss complex cases and empower primary care  teams in their clinical and community management.  The result is that around 80% of people approaching  GES for help with mental health conditions are  treated by primary care professionals. Sources: Aguilera et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Bitran, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Araya et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 79 Chapter 4 Benefits of change

4.2 Promoting and protecting  human rights Investment and transformation in mental  health is needed to help stop the widespread  human rights violations that people with mental  health conditions experience worldwide. In 2008, the Convention on the Rights of Persons  with Disabilities (CRPD) came into force.  Comprising 50 individual Articles, this legally  binding treaty marked a major milestone in efforts  to promote, protect and ensure the full and equal  enjoyment of all human rights for people with  disabilities, including psychosocial disabilities.  Psychosocial disabilities arise when  someone’s long-term mental impairments  interact with societal barriers such as  stigma, discrimination and exclusion, and so  hinder their full and effective participation  in society on an equal basis with others. Among a range of human rights, the CRPD  is designed to ensure all people have the  full and equal enjoyment of the right to: •	 life; •	 equal recognition before the law (legal capacity);  •	 access to justice; •	 liberty and security of the person; •	 freedom from exploitation, violence and abuse; •	 live independently and be included in the  community; •	 habitation and rehabilitation; •	 health, education, work and employment; •	 adequate standard of living and social  protection; and •	 participation in political and public life. The CRPD is invaluable in ensuring that  people experiencing mental health conditions  have these rights. But despite widespread  ratification of the CRPD, people with mental  health conditions worldwide continue to be  denied human rights and protections through  discriminatory attitudes, actions and laws.  They are also often subjected to serious abuse,  both in institutions and in the community. As  long as these human rights violations are not  fully addressed – including redressing physical,  attitudinal, communication, social and legal  barriers – there will be psychosocial disability. 4.2.1 Action against stigma  and discrimination Stigma, which is pervasive in the general  population and in the health sector, is a major  barrier to improved mental health services  and self-care. It is present in homes, schools,  workplaces, communities and even within  the mental health care system itself (183). Stigma leads to social isolation and discrimination,  which impacts a person’s ability to earn an  income, have a voice, gain access to quality  care, be part of their community and recover  from their mental health condition. It creates  the conditions for violations of multiple human  rights across multiple settings (see Fig. 4.1). Stigma can lead to social  isolation, discrimination and  violations of human rights  across multiple settings. In some countries, having a mental health condition  provides legal grounds for divorce. In others,  people with mental health conditions can lose their  parental or voting rights, or may be denied a driving  licence. In some countries, children with mental  health conditions cannot obtain birth certificates  80 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

or other identity documents (184). Around the  world, people living with mental health conditions  are frequently excluded from community life and  denied basic rights. They are also discriminated against in the fields of  employment, education and housing. The right to  work is one of the most commonly violated rights.  Even when people with a mental health condition  are able to get a job, they are often underpaid (22).  And many children and adolescents living with  mental health conditions are sent to segregated  schools that tend to provide lower-quality  education; or they are institutionalized in facilities  that provide no or highly-limited education (22). In all cases, stigma and discriminatory  attitudes and directives can adversely  impact mental health and hinder people’s  recovery (read Lion’s experience). FIG. 4.1 Common human rights violations against people with mental health conditions  and the settings in which they take place  Source:  Drew et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. SETTINGS WHERE ABUSE CAN HAPPEN COMMON HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS Exclusion, marginalization and discrimination Denial of employment opportunities Physical abuse and violence No access to eﬀective mental health services Sexual abuse and violence Arbitrary detention Denial of rights to marry and have children No means to enable living in the community Denied access to general health services Financial exploitation Shared community spaces Home and family settings Workplaces Mental health services and facilities Hospitals and health services Prisons and the judicial system Government and oﬀicial services Schools 81 Chapter 4 Benefits of change

NARRATIVE I’ve encountered ignorance  and stigma Lion’s experience I’ve used various rehabilitation services over the years.  and I have encountered ignorance and stigma. Some  services were just unhelpful to me. Some actively  harmed my recovery journey. I’ll never forget the nurse in the psychiatric ward who  chased me around when she caught me doing yoga in  my room, berating me that this type of activity was not  allowed. It took me ten years to start doing yoga again:  it was a trigger that kept bringing me back to that  difficult experience of hospitalization. At one point I applied for financial assistance to fund a  degree in social work. I was already managing the first  ever peer-support programme in a psychiatric hospital  in Israel. But the social worker who helped me through  the application process told me it would be immoral to  let me study social work. Even when I passed my tests  with high grades, they tried to convince me to study  education, saying that would be easier for me. Today I lead the lived experience department at Enosh,  the Israeli mental health association. We provide  recovery resources to individuals and families coping  with psychosocial disability. We work hard to promote  person-oriented and trauma-aware services and  practices that support recovery. The difficult experiences I’ve been through and the  ignorance I’ve encountered have also led me to lecture  in therapeutic circles. At first I was begging to be heard,  but slowly I have been invited to give more and more  paid lectures. The need had probably existed for a long  time. The therapists’ desire to learn and improve the  existing therapeutic services fill me with hope. Lion Gai Meir, Israel (see also my narrative on page 44) Stopping stigma Evidence from high- and low-income countries  suggests that anti-stigma interventions  can change public attitudes for the better,  lessening experiences of discrimination  among people living with mental health  conditions (185). Anti-stigma strategies tend  to fall into one of three categories (186). •	 Education strategies use facts to address myths  and misconceptions. They include literacy  campaigns, public awareness campaigns and a  wide range of training and learning activities. •	 Contact strategies aim to shift negative  attitudes in the general population through  interactions with people living with mental  health conditions. They may include direct  social contact, simulated contact, video contact  or online contact, as well as the use of peer  support services in health care settings. 82 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

BOX 4.2 Research to tackle stigma: The INDIGO Network  The INDIGO Network runs an evidence-based  research and implementation programme to  understand the mechanisms and consequences of  stigma and discrimination in more than 40 countries;  and to develop and test new ways to end stigma.  Several LMICs participate in the network, including  Bangladesh, Brazil, China, Egypt, Ethiopia, India,  Jamaica, Malaysia, Nepal, Nigeria, South Africa,  Tunisia, Türkiye and Venezuela. The network coordinates multi-site projects, for  example, to evaluate campaigns on improving  referral rates to local health care services; or  to investigate the potential of training medical  students in order to improve knowledge, attitudes  and behaviour towards people with mental health  conditions. The INDIGO website offers scales to  assess stigma and discrimination. The INDIGO Network hosts an international research  programme (the INDIGO Partnership) for developing  and testing evidence-based, contextually adapted  interventions to tackle stigma and discrimination.  This programme involves research partners at seven  collaborating institutions in China, Ethiopia, India,  Nepal and Tunisia, and aims to generate findings and  materials that can be applied to other LMICs. Sources: The Indigo Network, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Thornicroft et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. CASE STUDY •	 Protest strategies provide formal objections  to stigma and discrimination. They include  public demonstrations, letter writing,  petitions, product boycotts and other  advocacy campaigns. Research on the impact of these strategies  suggests that, for most groups of people, social  contact is the most effective type of intervention  to improve stigma-related knowledge and  attitudes (185). Research findings also support  active engagement and empowerment of people  with lived experience across all levels of the  mental health care system (see In focus: Engaging  and empowering people with lived experience). Several high-income countries have successfully  used large-scale public awareness campaigns and  contact-based strategies to create positive changes  in public attitudes to mental health (see Table 4.2). Social contact is the most  effective type of intervention  to improve stigma-related  knowledge and attitudes. There is also much promise of broad, coordinated  evidence-based programmes in LMICs (see  Box 4.2 Research to tackle stigma: The INDIGO  Network), and large-scale government-led  campaigns focusing on social contact in  these contexts are needed (185, 187). Beyond direct anti-stigma campaigns,  stigma can likely be reduced through work  focused on improving the quality of care  (see Box 4.4 WHO QualityRights). 83 Chapter 4 Benefits of change

TABLE 4.2  National campaigns leading to positive changes in public attitudes towards  mental health  CAMPAIGN  AND COUNTRY ACTIVITIES KEY FINDINGS TIME TO  CHANGE Anti-stigma  campaign   England •	 Social marketing and media  activity. •	 Local community events.  •	 Grants for projects led by people  with lived experience. •	 Targeted interventions for  stakeholders, e.g. students,  teachers, employers, and young  people. •	 Research and evaluation. •	 Social marketing and media activity was  most effective at influencing intended  behaviour toward people with mental  health conditions. •	 Grassroots contact-based projects  were particularly effective at reducing  self-stigma. •	 Public awareness was strongly associated  with campaign activity and increased  awareness was associated with more  favourable attitudes.  BEYONDBLUE Mental health  literacy  programme    Australia •	 Focus on depression and anxiety. •	 Media advertising and training. •	 School-based programmes. •	 Mental health first aid training. •	 Community discussion forums. •	 Mental health champions. •	 Research and evaluation. •	 States with more activity saw more  improvement in public awareness about  depression and the benefits of treatment. •	 Training programmes delivered moderate  increases in knowledge about mental  illness. •	 Public perception of depressed people as  dangerous and unpredictable persists.  OPENING  MINDS Contact-based  education    Canada •	 Targeted interventions for  stakeholders (youths, health  care providers, employers and  employees, news media). •	 Mental health champions. •	 Research and evaluation. •	 Big media campaigns were not effective at  changing attitudes. •	 Programmes that target a specific mental  health condition may reduce stigma more  effectively than those targeting mental  ill-health in general. •	 The quality of the contact matters more  than the duration: stories of hope and  recovery were the most successful. Source:  Committee on the Science of Changing Behavioral Health Social Norms et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 84 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

4.2.2 The right to quality care Everyone has a right to dignified, humane,  responsive, acceptable, and decent care that  respects their human rights. Yet too often people  with mental health conditions are subject to some  of the world’s worst human rights abuses by the  very health services responsible for their care. From psychiatric hospitals all over the world  there are reports of ill-treatment including  physical, mental and sexual abuse, and  neglect. People with mental health conditions  may be arbitrarily confined in hospitals for  years without reassessment of their medical  status. They may be overmedicalized,  given harmful or degrading treatments or  routinely subjected to interventions without  informed consent (22). In many countries,  the poor conditions and infrastructure that  are associated with psychiatric hospitals are  also prevalent in nursing and care homes,  rehabilitation centres, orphanages and  overnight-stay facilities for traditional or  spiritual healing of mental health conditions. Many people in mental health  institutions are shackled: locked  away in small, prison-like cells  with no human contact. Many people with mental health conditions  are shackled: locked away in small, prison-like  cells with no human contact; or chained to  their beds, unable to move for long periods  of time (184). Large institutions especially  are renown for degrading living conditions  marked by overcrowding, unsanitary  environments, unnourishing or insufficient  meals and pervasive tobacco smoke (read Mrs  BN’s experience in Chapter [PHONE_REDACTED]. Children  are particularly vulnerable to the violence  and neglect associated with institutional  environments (see Box 4.3 Children in  institutions). So too are older adults, with  one out of ten staff in institutional settings  across high-income countries admitting to  elder physical abuse over the past year (191). Accordingly, there is a great need to  transform mental health care to make it  community-based (see Chapter 7 Restructuring  and scaling up care for impact). Maltreatment is not confined to institutional care. People with severe mental health  conditions can find themselves hidden away  by family members, chained or caged in the  home, physically or sexually abused in prisons  or subjected to violence in the community  (192). Mental health outpatient care also often  violates human rights, as evidenced by treatment  that is routinely forced and purely biomedical,  not addressing people’s needs and rights for  inclusion, social care and protection, among  others. And while traditional healing can be  highly supportive and meaningful to people,  it can also involve abusive practices (134). Those who experience abuse rarely have  access to proper judicial mechanisms. In  many countries, people with mental health  conditions have little opportunity to raise  complaints for ill-treatment or involuntary  admission (193). Crimes committed against  people with mental health conditions also  frequently go undocumented because police  or prosecutors have unfounded concerns  about the victims’ credibility as witnesses. Ill-treatment and abuse cause psychosocial  disability, impede people’s recovery  and often worsen their mental health  condition. Any transformation towards  community-based mental health care  must address human rights violations. Stronger rights in mental health care Preventing ill-treatment and abuse in mental hea lth services requires a mix of strategies  designed to shift attitudes, strengthen rights 85 Chapter 4 Benefits of change

EVIDENCE BOX 4.3 Children in institutions  An estimated 5.4 million children live in institutional  care around the world, many of whom have mental  health conditions.  Many institutions for children are unregistered,  making monitoring almost impossible. They often  provide environments that are neglectful and more  abusive than they are caring. Children often live far  from home and spend their days in overcrowded  rooms, rarely interacting with staff, family members  or other children. Many of the buildings are poorly  maintained and have insanitary washing facilities  and poor sleeping conditions. Children are often  inadequately clothed, malnourished, inappropriately  medicated and physically restrained. In many  institutions, violence is pervasive. Institutionalization often harms children’s mental  and physical health. Children in institutions are  more likely to have mental health conditions than  children brought up in the community, including  higher rates of aggressive behaviour, depression and  anxiety, bedwetting, attention deficit hyperactivity  disorder (ADHD) and oppositional defiant disorder.  They are more likely to have problems with antisocial  conduct, social competence and play. And they often  experience attachment difficulties too.  A lack of general check-ups and immunizations also  means that childhood diseases are more common  among institutionalized children than in the general  population; and death rates are far higher. A transformation in mental health that shifts the care  of children with psychosocial disabilities away from  institutions towards community services and support  will not only ensure that human rights are respected  in line with the CRPD and other international  frameworks but will also lead to better health and  development outcomes for children in care. Sources: Desmond et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]; UNICEF, [PHONE_REDACTED]. and reshape care environments (23). While  combatting stigma is important, other tools   and tactics are key to eliminate ill-treatment  and uphold human rights. These include: •	 rights-based laws and policies;  •	 development and scaling up of rights-  and community-based services that are  people-centred and recovery-oriented; •	 monitoring and evaluation of mental  health services;  •	 active participation of people with lived  experience of mental health conditions in  decision-making processes, monitoring  mechanisms, design and delivery of services; •	 appropriate training for mental health  professionals to address stigma and  discrimination and to build capacity on the rights  of persons with mental health conditions; and •	 reporting on rights-based policy to global  conventions (see Box 4.4 WHO QualityRights). In all cases, providing accountability and redress  mechanisms to record, prevent and respond  to human rights abuses is important. In some  countries, the office of the ombudsperson or  86 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

TOOL BOX 4.4 WHO QualityRights QualityRights is a global initiative designed to improve  the quality of care in mental health and related services  and to promote the rights of people with psychosocial,  intellectual and cognitive disabilities. The initiative  works at the ground level to directly change attitudes  and practices, as well as through policy to create  sustainable change. The initiative covers the following areas of work: •	 capacity building to combat stigma and  discrimination and promote human rights and  recovery; •	 creating community-based, person-centred  and recovery-oriented services that respect and  promote human rights; •	 improving the quality of care and human rights  conditions in mental health and related services; •	 supporting civil society movements and people  with lived experience to undertake advocacy and  influence policy-making; and •	 reforming laws and policies in line with the CRPD  and other international standards. Across all areas of work, QualityRights develops and  deploys a diverse range of training materials, toolkits,  technical support and practical guidance to support  a human rights and recovery approach to mental  health. Combined, these resources are designed to  help advance mental health, eliminate stigma and  promote inclusion. They aim to build knowledge and  skills among mental health practitioners, service  users and others, for example on how to end coercive  practices such as seclusion and restraint and how  to respect people’s will and preferences. There is  also guidance on peer support and advocacy for  mental health, as well as a transformation toolkit for  reshaping services to better promote human rights. The initiative also provides QualityRights e-training  on mental health, recovery and community inclusion  for health workers, policy-makers, carers, community  members and people with lived experience. The  e-training covers how to support a person’s own  mental health and that of others, and how to promote  human rights to help tackle stigma, discrimination,  abuses and coercion experienced by people with  mental health conditions. The QualityRights e-training  has been launched globally, making it available to all  people in all countries. In Ghana, where it has been  ongoing since March 2019, more than [PHONE_REDACTED]people  had successfully completed the online QualityRights  training by May 2022. A 2019 evaluation showed important and positive  shifts in attitudes towards human rights among  participants completing the QualityRights  e-training, including on the right to legal capacity,  informed consent, ending coercive practices and  community inclusion. Sources: WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]; WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]; WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Funk et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. Access the WHO QualityRights e-training at: https://www.who.int/teams/mental-health-and-substance-use/policy-law-rights/qr-e-training. 87 Chapter 4 Benefits of change

similar structure – a public official or entity  appointed by, but at arm’s length from,  the national government or parliament  – provides an important source of  information, mediation and redress.  4.2.3 Autonomy in health  decision-making  Being able to make decisions about one’s life –  including the right to choose one’s own mental  health care – is key to a person’s autonomy  and personhood. The CRPD commits countries to recognizing that  people with mental health conditions enjoy legal  capacity on an equal basis with everyone else.  And yet involuntary hospital admissions, and  care against the wishes of someone experiencing  a mental health condition, are routinely and  widely practiced across the world, facilitated  by laws and practices that give guardians of  people with mental health conditions extensive  substitute decision-making powers. Today, in all  countries, decisions made by clinicians or other  officials can legally supersede the preference  of individuals with mental health conditions,  which can lead to them being detained against  their will and forced to have treatment. The use of involuntary admission and  treatment remains the subject of concern and  debate among and between service users and  professionals (199, 200, 201, 202). Laws on  substitute decision-making and coercive care  are typically intended to safeguard the interests  and well-being of affected people and people in  their communities. But they do restrict people’s  ability to choose where to live, how to manage  their finances or what medical treatment to  accept. Through substitute decision-making,  people experiencing mental health conditions lose  their rights to informed consent, confidentiality,  privacy and communication with family members.  Frequently, people end up in institutions and  exposed to seclusion or restraint. Involuntary  admission can lead to horrific experiences  (read Sandra’s experience). And fear of coercion  can stop people from seeking help when  they experience mental health problems. Changing the paradigm: supported  decision making Evidence and experience suggest that there are  many strategies available for reducing involuntary  admission and coercive treatment in mental  health care. Staff training and integrated care are  both effective interventions (203, 204). So too is  using supported decision-making as an alternative  to substitute decision-making, guardianship or  other processes that exclude or go against the  involvement and will of the person affected (205). Supported decision-making is about supporting  people to exercise their own choices about their  lives, including about their mental health care. In supported decision-making, the person with  a mental health condition chooses someone  or a network of people who they trust to serve  as their supporter. The person with a mental  health condition is always the decision-maker;  the supporter is available to discuss the  issues, options or choices when necessary and  communicates the will and preferences of the  person if they are unable to do so themselves. Supported decision-making is about  supporting people to exercise their  own choices about their lives. In practice, supported decision-making can take  many forms and includes support organizations  and networks, advanced plans and provisions,  independent advocates, peer support and  personal assistance. It can be done through  a legal document, for example an advance  directive that specifies what actions should be  taken for a person if they are no longer able  88 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

NARRATIVE Twelve hospital admissions;  only one was my choice Sandra’s experience Pinned down by policemen and paramedics. Gagged  and handcuffed like a criminal as I was knocked  unconscious by a medical cocktail. Waking up not  knowing where I am, clothes off in what feels like a  prison. My crime? At worst, being loud, antagonistic  and manic. My life sentence? Bipolar disorder. This  was the first of my eleven involuntary hospital  admissions. I was literally stripped of any semblance  of human rights or dignity. And it was terrifying. I was given my diagnosis and some meds and sent  home, confused and already falling into depression.  Empty and emotionless I was also feeling the side  effects of the medication – severe parkinsonism,  akathisia and tremors. A year on. Boom! Mania. I was out of control. My  family was worried. Involuntary hospital admission  number two. At least the staff treated me with care  and compassion. No restraints this time. Human  kindness and empathy go a long way. New meds  and on I go. Two years later I am in denial about having a mental  health condition and default on my medication.  Relapse. Involuntary admission number three. Back  in restraints. I’m told this is the end of the line. If I  don’t get it together here, I will go into placement  where my family won’t be allowed to see me. Worse  than prison. Eventually I’m discharged. Four years on. My marriage is falling apart and so am  I. Involuntary admission number four. Restrained and  intravenously injected with what feels like boiling  water through my veins. A new side effect emerges  and I get stroke-like symptoms every time I have a  ‘knock out’ injection. Over the next four years I was involuntarily  hospitalized seven times, including three times in  a single fortnight. New meds and a new side-effect:  sleep paralysis. My twelfth and last admission was different. It was  my choice. Voluntary. Acceptance that I needed help.  More than help, I wanted support. My psychiatrist  was stern but also patient and empathetic. She  believed in my life and I felt she truly had my best  interests at heart. My medication is finally on point. I fell time and again to find my own way back up. I  will continue trying and learning and, for effort alone,  I will always succeed. Sandra Ferreira, South Africa 89 Chapter 4 Benefits of change

to make decisions for themselves because of  illness or incapacity. Or it can be less formal,  for example involving personal supporters who  are trusted contacts of the person involved. In all cases, supported decision-making: •	 respects the rights and wishes of the person; •	 does not advance the interests of others; •	 does not attempt to influence the person to  make decisions they do not want to make; •	 provides the level of support requested by the  person; and •	 is used for as short or long a time as the person  requests it. Pockets of supported decision-making can be  found all over the world, including in the Americas,  Europe, South-East Asia and the Western Pacific.  In the past five years Colombia, India, Peru and  the Philippines have all passed legislation to  remove barriers to legal capacity and recognize  the role of supported decision-making in the  context of mental health services (23). In South America, where a number of countries are  making progress in supported decision-making,  programmes often rely on informal support  mechanisms provided through civil society  organizations, including organizations of persons  with lived experience (see Box 4.5 Supported  decision-making in South America). While there  is still much to be learned in how to implement  supported decision-making in different treatment  and resource situations, it is clear that investment  and transformation in mental health must  include advancing supported decision-making. 90 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

CASE STUDY BOX 4.5 Supported decision-making in South America Argentina: drawing on day-to-day life for support In 2017–2018, Argentina’s Persons with Disabilities:  The Exercise of Their Legal Capacity and  Decision-making pilot project used participants’  daily experience of psychosocial and intellectual  disabilities to identify and critically analyse support  systems for decision-making. Participants used  person-centred planning to identify support  individuals and networks (as well as limitations) in  their day-to-day life. The project evaluation stressed the need for a flexible  and dynamic toolbox of support and identified  the role of organizational structures for designing  supported decision-making. Colombia: planning for life Colombia’s Supported Decision Making and  Community Life pilot project in 2015–2016 built  a personalized support system to build capacity  for decision-making, improved relationships and  independent living. Participants used life-planning  tools to develop a map of networks that they could  draw on for support; and created a personalized  booklet describing their goals, dreams, and basic  preferences. Qualitative interviews and observation of  participants revealed that some individuals were  empowered to make their voices heard, and that  families adjusted their approach to support. Peru: engaging individuals, groups and whole  communities In 2016–2018, the Support Networks for Decision  Making and Community Life pilot project used  one-to-one planning and counselling as well as  group workshops, peer support, family meetings  and broader stakeholder mapping and outreach to  promote decision-making support networks.  Participants reported feeling empowered through  greater knowledge.  Source: Vásquez et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 91 Chapter 4 Benefits of change

IN FOCUS Engaging and empowering  people with lived experience Valuing the insight of people with lived experience of mental health conditions, and  giving them voice, choice and influence in multiple aspects of the mental health care  system, is a vital step towards transforming mental health worldwide. People with lived experience may have survived human rights abuses by mental  health services, and as such they have much insight into how mental health  services can fail people. They can be powerful advocates for people-centred,  recovery-oriented, human rights-based mental health care and for policy and  legislation that protects their rights. Empowerment gives people with lived experience better understanding and control  over their lives (207). It requires governments, employers, educational institutions,  nongovernmental organizations and members of the public to remove barriers that  may hinder full and effective participation in society for people with lived experience  of mental health conditions. Over recent decades there has been a progressive shift towards service users and their  carers having greater involvement at different levels within the mental health system. •	 Personal level: involvement in one’s own health care planning, assessment and  management, for example through shared decision-making, advanced planning,  supported self-management and person-centred recovery approaches to care. •	 Community level: involvement in local service planning, delivery, monitoring and  evaluation, advocacy, public awareness campaigns (especially to reduce stigma),  and training for mental health staff and others. •	 Strategic level: participation in shaping mental health policy, plans and laws,  service monitoring and research. Participatory approaches are key to implementing UHC (208). Yet they are still  infrequently applied to mental health care in many countries. The growth in  participatory processes for people with lived experience has mainly taken place in  high-income countries (209). Only a third of middle-income countries – and just 16%  of low-income ones – have a formal mechanism in place for involving service user  associations in the mental health system (5). There are varying degrees of participation, from being consulted to joint  decision-making; and from being involved in service-delivery to user-led services.  Whatever the level of involvement, it is important that participation is not   tokenistic; and that the views of people with lived experience are fully considered and  92

valued in policy and practice. This requires time.  In all cases, provisions should be made to ensure  individuals are adequately supported throughout the  participatory process. Positive partnerships for care Empowering people to have control over their life  and mental health care instils personal dignity,  value and respect. It can increase self-esteem and  confidence. It also gives people a level of choice and  autonomy they may not have received otherwise. At the same time, meaningful engagement of people  with lived experience builds service providers’  understanding of what it’s like to have a mental  health condition; it can help challenge assumptions  and increase the level of trust between them and  service users. The potential result is better therapeutic  relationships and more equal, collaborative and  effective partnerships of care. Individuals and health  care providers can work together to map out the  options for care and select those that are most  appropriate and acceptable to the individual (see  section 7.1.1 Putting people first). All this contributes positively towards a  person’s recovery and quality of life (read  Alexandra’s experience). NARRATIVE Autonomy was the key to my  recovery Alexandra’s experience Receiving autonomy over my mental health care  was the greatest contributor to my recovery. I was  diagnosed with a mental illness when I was seven.  Throughout my childhood and adolescence, I had no  say in my own recovery: my own ideas of what would  work well for me were often dismissed. This lack of  autonomy eroded my already-low self-esteem and  worsened my mental illness. I remember walking into my current therapist’s office  at the age of nineteen. I was a shell of an individual.  Years of being forced into specific care pathways and  bubble-wrapped by caring adults had shattered my  confidence. I barely believed I was capable of making  basic decisions, let alone helping myself. But this  therapist was different: she saw me as a person rather  than my mental illness. She asked me about interests,  wanted to know my work style, and was eager to work  together to construct a pathway to mental well-being. We started small, but with her guidance, I gradually  gained the confidence to make complex decisions  about my health and well-being. Her willingness to  collaborate with me, create care plans that suited  me as an individual, while still giving me the space  to make autonomous decisions, helped me build the  confidence to thrive not only mentally, but in all other  areas of my life. To this day, I attribute my recovery to  her collaborative nature. Alexandra M Schuster, United Kingdom 93 Chapter 4 Benefits of change

Social contact for better care Social contact strategies that engage people with  lived experience are the evidence-based way of  reducing stigma in the community (see section 4.2.1  Action against stigma and discrimination: Stopping  stigma). They are also important for reducing stigma  among service providers. Stigma among primary care  providers likely contributes to low rates of detection  of mental health conditions in primary care. A pilot study in Nepal suggests that involving people  with lived experience as co-facilitators in mhGAP  training programmes for primary care workers may  be effective in reducing stigma (210). Interestingly,  the study also found that primary care workers who  are co-trained by people with lived experience may  be more likely to diagnose mental health conditions  accurately. Networks to enable  engagement Peer-led networks and organizations have a key role  in enabling people with lived experience to engage  with their care. Networks can be a vital source of  mutual support for mental health service users. And  they often also supply encouragement, resources and  formal infrastructure for the systemic advocacy and  self-advocacy that is needed to facilitate change. Through peer-led organizations, people with lived  experience have helped educate communities,  inform and influence policy-makers, denounce  stigma and discrimination and fight for improved  services and legal rights (211). During the COVID-19 pandemic, peer-led  organizations have been particularly valuable in  giving voice to people with lived experience. The  Global Mental Health Peer Network (GMHPN) and  partners, for example, surveyed people with lived  experience on the psychosocial consequences of the  pandemic and advocated for greater equality and  equity in the pandemic response (212). At a national  level, user organizations have stepped in to provide  extra support services: for example, the Psychiatric  Disability Organization Kenya offers psychosocial  support for prison staff (7). The Comprehensive mental health action plan  2013–2030 calls for action that helps organizations of  persons with mental health conditions to participate  in reorganizing, delivering, and evaluating and  monitoring services. In practice, supporting these  organizations may include, for example, efforts to: •	 encourage their creation; •	 build their capacity to effectively advocate for  human rights; •	 establish mechanisms to ensure their full  participation in policy-making; •	 involve them in monitoring and evaluating mental  health services; and •	 include them in capacity-building efforts for  stakeholders. For more information on supporting the participation of people with lived experience in directing and delivering services, see:   www.who.int/publications/i/item/who-qualityrights-guidance-and-training-tools. 94 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

4.3 Enabling social and economic  development Mental health is an essential, if often neglected,  issue in social policy and economic development.  Poor mental health puts a brake on development  by reducing productivity, straining social relationships and compounding cycles of poverty  and disadvantage. Conversely, when people are  physically and mentally healthy, and reside or  work in mentally healthy environments, they  can study or work productively and contribute  to their communities, to the benefit of all. Growing evidence shows that transforming the  mental health agenda requires not only enhanced  access to quality services and care. It also  requires greater attention to, and investment in  addressing, the underlying social and economic  realities of life that shape people’s mental health.  Countries are already committed to addressing  these realities through the SDGs of the 2030  Agenda for Sustainable Development. The  links between mental health and the SDGs are  complex and, in many cases, bidirectional (see  Table 4.3). Progress towards achieving the SDGs  has the potential to promote and protect mental  health (15). At the same time, improved health  outcomes, including mental health outcomes, are  important to realizing the SDGs’ full ambition. 95 Chapter 4 Benefits of change

TABLE 4.3  Mental health is linked to each of the SDGs SDG LINKS WITH MENTAL HEALTH 1 No poverty •	 Mental health conditions are closely linked to poverty in a vicious cycle of  disadvantage. 2 Zero hunger •	 Poor nutrition impairs cognitive and emotional development in children. •	 Food insecurity increases the risk of mental health conditions in adults. 3 Good health and well-being •	 Mental health is an integral part of general health and well-being. 4 Quality education •	 Mental health is important for learning; and learning environments are  key determinants of mental health.  •	 People with mental health conditions experience barriers in accessing  education. 5 Gender equality •	 Inequity and gender-based violence are risk factors for mental health  conditions. 6 Clean water and sanitation •	 Socioeconomic deprivation and poor access to facilities creates multiple  life stressors and is linked with a range of mental health conditions. 7 Affordable and clean energy 8 Decent work and economic  growth •	 Work practices and environments are determinants of mental health. •	 People with mental health conditions experience barriers in accessing  decent work. 9 Industry, innovation and  infrastructure •	 Employment and economic growth is an important protective factor  against mental health conditions. 10 Reduced inequalities •	 Discrimination and inequitable treatment of people with mental health  conditions is pervasive and causes psychological stress. 11 Sustainable cities and  communities •	 Well-planned urbanization can benefit mental health through improved  access to work, education and housing as well as safe environments and  green spaces. •	 Exposure to community-level violence is a risk factor for mental health  conditions. 12 Responsible consumption and  production •	 Socioeconomic deprivation and poor access to resources are linked to a  range of mental health conditions. 13 Climate action •	 Climate change and environmental events cause human suffering and  can undermine mental health. 14 Life below water •	 The availability of natural resources on land and at sea impacts people’s  health, including their mental health. 15 Life on land 16 Peace, justice, and strong  institutions •	 Conflict and violence is a major threat to mental health, while mental  health may contribute to reduced violence. 17 Partnerships for the goals •	 Mental health is a universal concern. •	 Lessons from mental health partnerships can be applied to the SDG agenda. Source:  Lund et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 96 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

A holistic approach to mental health promotion,  protection, care and recovery provides for  greater equality of opportunity (with respect to  education, income and social inclusion) as well  as service access, especially for those exposed to  or living in precarious or vulnerable situations. In short, the benefits of better mental health  extend beyond psychological well-being  itself, from social equity and inclusion  to economic growth and prosperity. 4.3.1 Social equality and  inclusion As discussed in Chapter 2 Principles and drivers  in public mental health, our mental well-being is  constantly being shaped and re-shaped by the  environment in which we find ourselves. Someone  whose life is marked by diminishing opportunities,  social exclusion and economic insecurity will have a  different mental health trajectory to that of someone  who grew up in, and continues to have, a stable,  supportive home, work and social environment.  Analyses in Europe reveal that, on average, men  and women living on the lowest incomes are twice  as likely to report poor mental health compared  with those with the highest incomes (213). Accordingly, a key requirement for successful  mental health transformation at the population  level is to reduce or eliminate local and national  disparities or inequalities as they relate to mental  health. This is a goal in itself and the benefits of  successful action against such inequalities can be  added to the case for investing in mental health.   The Comprehensive mental health action plan  2013–2030 identifies implementation options  for addressing disparities; and these were  further highlighted by the World Mental Health  Day in 2021, the theme of which was “Mental  Health in an Unequal World” (214). Proposed  strategies include actions against interpersonal  violence, inimical immigration policies and  racism; and actions for child protection, decent  working conditions and social inclusion.  Addressing disparities requires a major step  up in multisectoral action to address the social  and structural determinants of mental health to  achieve social justice (see section 6.1.3 Making  structural changes for mental health). It requires  a transformation in the social exclusion of people  with mental health conditions, who are often  denied basic social and civil rights (see section  4.2.1 Action against stigma and discrimination).  It also requires a transformation in access to  care to ensure that mental health services are  available to all people in society, at all stages of  life. Too often, services focus on adults to the  neglect of services for children, adolescents  and older people. Gender differences need to  be considered in every area of mental health  intervention, with special attention paid to survivors  of gender-based violence and to gender-identity  minorities, who often find mental health services  discriminatory (read Kat’s experience). Other priority groups identified by the  Comprehensive mental health action plan  2013–2030 include homeless people and people  in the criminal justice system or in detention, as  well as: asylum seekers, refugees and irregular  migrants; marginalized ethnic groups, including  indigenous people; people with physical and  intellectual disabilities; and people affected  by complex emergencies. Interventions and  support targeted at these groups can help reduce  existing inequalities and promote social inclusion,  thereby contributing to ensuring interventions  to support mental health are universal, yet  are calibrated proportionately to the level of  disadvantage (proportionate universalism) (215). In all cases, reaching people living in vulnerable  conditions requires mental health (and  other) services to be more accessible, closely  coordinated with social care and widely  known about. Experience suggests that  97 Chapter 4 Benefits of change

NARRATIVE Reforming mental health care for  the LGBTIQ+ community Kat’s experience  When I engage with my country’s mental health  system, I apply filters to my sexuality. Each time I  filter out my sexuality, I feel like I’ve taken several  steps backward in my recovery. But I do it because I  have experienced homophobic comments and lack of  understanding. My experiences of discrimination have made me  outspoken about the need to reform our mental  health systems for the LGBTIQ+ community. Our  mental health systems must acknowledge the harm  they caused, for reformation to begin. The decision  to include certain sexualities in international disease  classifications, for example, created untold damage.  Many countries, including my own, have continued  to embrace these classifications. Although some no  longer exist in updated publications, the effects of  international discriminating policies and diagnoses  still linger, particularly in countries where LGBTIQ+  persons have few or no rights. Beyond acknowledging the harm done, we need  equitable action that removes stigma, for example  updating Trinidad and Tobago’s Mental Health Act  of 1975 to include the need for equitable service  delivery for LGBTIQ+ persons. Developing and  enforcing zero discrimination policies that help the  mental health workforce unpack biases will also help  bring about much-needed change. Additionally, investing in the mental health workforce  so that more people in the LGBTIQ+ community  are educated in mental health and hired as mental  health professionals can help foster a safer mental  health system. Further, reshaping our systems  to include peer supporters, especially from the  LGBTIQ+ community, can ensure that those on their  recovery journey are supported by others with similar  experiences. Most importantly, it is time to truly practice the words  “nothing for us without us” and give the LGBTIQ+  community – especially those with lived experience  of mental health conditions – an equal role in shaping  our mental health system from policy development  to service delivery. Those with lived experiences can  point out what works in our systems because we  have engaged with these systems for years. We can  also point practitioners towards better solutions. We  need to encourage meaningful collaboration between  LGBTIQ+ persons with mental health conditions and  traditional mental health professionals. Lived experiences must begin taking priority,  especially LGBTIQ+ experiences. Kat McIntosh, Trinidad and Tobago 98 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

reaching marginalized groups of long-term  unemployed, street sex workers, refugees,  irregular migrants, and homeless people can be  achieved by establishing outreach programmes,  integrating mental health into general health  care, coordinating social and health care and  disseminating information to both individuals  and practitioners (47). A sound organization of  mental health services – as described in Chapter  7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact – is  instrumental in reaching marginalized people. 4.3.2 Economic benefits  The economic implications of diminished  mental health are enormous and extend far  beyond the direct costs of treatment (see  section 3.2 Economic consequences). Good mental health enables people to work  productively and realize their full potential.  Conversely, poor mental health interferes with  people’s ability to work, study and learn new skills.  It holds back children’s educational attainment  which can impact future employment prospects.  Meanwhile, adults living with mental health  conditions may find that they are not able to work,  or cannot work as well as usual, often for extended  periods of time. Carers may be similarly affected. A survey on household costs associated with  mental health conditions in six countries across  sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia found that  households where someone had a mental health  condition were economically worse off than control  households. For example, they had lower housing  standards, lower household income, fewer assets,  and higher health care expenditures (216). Work losses not only affect individual and household  abilities to earn a living but also contribute to wider  societal costs through increased unemployment  and welfare needs, lost productivity, workplace  accidents and reduced taxation revenue. Researchers estimate that 12 billion productive  work days are lost every year to depression and  anxiety alone, at a cost of nearly US$ 1 trillion  (217). This includes days lost to absenteeism,  presenteeism (when people go to work  but underperform) and staff turnover. Reducing individual, community and structural risks  to mental health while simultaneously increasing  access to effective care not only improves well-being  and social functioning but also leads to a range  of economic benefits for affected individuals and  their households. Such action can improve participation in, and productivity at, work and school,  reduce time spent on informal caregiving, reduce  demand for health and welfare services, and  increase the potential for savings or investment  (see Fig. 4.2). A recent systematic review found that  most of the mental health interventions assessed  led to improved economic outcomes, mainly in  relation to education and employment (218). Businesses and the wider economy also stand  to benefit from investment in improved mental  health through greater participation in the labour  market and higher productivity, both of which  serve to improve a company’s bottom line. A  study with ten companies in Canada showed  that workplace mental health programmes can  deliver a positive return on investment within  three years (219). For governments too, investing  in the population’s mental health can lead to  savings in welfare support: a recent analysis from  Denmark showed that an increase in mental  well-being was associated with lower health  care costs and sickness benefit transfers (220). 12 billion work days  are lost every year to  depression and anxiety. 99 Chapter 4 Benefits of change

Economic value and efficiency The costs and cost–effectiveness of treating  mental health conditions have become a very  important part of discussions about whether and  why countries should invest in mental health.  Accumulated evidence shows that there is a core  set of cost–effective interventions for priority  conditions that are also feasible, affordable and  appropriate even for resource-poor settings. FIG. 4.2 Some of the potential social and economic benefits of investing in mental health  Source: adapted from WHO and UNDP, [PHONE_REDACTED]. WHO’s menu of cost–effective interventions for  mental health identifies a selection of mental  health interventions for which cost–effectiveness  information is available (222). At a population  level, the menu identifies universal and indicated  school-based social and emotional learning  programmes and regulatory bans on highly  hazardous pesticides (which are commonly used  in suicides in several LMICs) as cost–effective  and affordable population-based interventions  (see Chapter 6 Promotion and prevention  for change) (222). At the individual level, the  menu lists a range of cost–effective clinical  interventions, which are also included in the WHO  ECONOMIC IMPACT SOCIAL IMPACT IMPROVED MENTAL HEALTH HEALTH IMPACT Death and disability Need for informal caregiving Health care costs Productivity Output Presenteeism Employment (ability to work) Absenteeism Income Welfare needs Savings Investment Social functioning Household production Life expectancy Suicide Health of others  (children, carers, spouse) 100 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

UHC compendium (see section 5.1.3 Evidence  to inform policy and practice). Of course, cost– effectiveness alone cannot provide the basis  for priority setting and WHO’s menu stresses  the importance of human rights and equity  when selecting mental health interventions. The returns on investment for clinical  interventions can be substantial, especially  for depression and anxiety. For example, one  global modelling study carried out for 36 large  countries indicates that a linear increase in  treatment coverage between 2016 and 2030  could secure 43 million extra years of healthy  life, at a value of US$ 310 billion, and generate a  further US$ 399 billion in productivity gains (217).  With the cost of scaling up treatment estimated  at US$ 147 billion, this provides a benefit cost  ratio of five to one (see Fig. 4.3). The highest  rewards for investing in depression are predicted  in lower-middle-income countries (217). Other modelling studies show that integrated  mental health packages that combine  multiple interventions for promotion,  prevention and care can bring significant  and large-scale returns, especially when  productivity gains and the value of wider social  benefits are considered (see Table 4.4). In South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, the cost  of scaling up delivery of an integrated package  for epilepsy, depression, bipolar disorder,  schizophrenia and heavy alcohol use has been  calculated at US$ 3–4 per capita. The return on  that investment is estimated at 500–1 000 healthy  years of life for every million dollars spent (223). Elsewhere, the cost of implementing a care  package in non-specialist settings has been  estimated to be even lower. Studies in Ethiopia,  India, Nepal, South Africa and Uganda calculate  it to be less than US$ 1 per capita. These studies  suggest that, over a ten-year scale-up period, the  additional amount that would need to be invested  each year is less than US$ 0.10 per capita (224). FIG. 4.3.  Returns to investment in scaling up  treatment for depression and anxiety  (benefit to cost ratios) Source: Chisholm et al, [PHONE_REDACTED].  [PHONE_REDACTED]High-income countries Upper-middle- -income countries Lower-middle- -income countries Low-income countries 4.2 3.3 5.7 3.8 5.4 3.9 5.3 4.0 Depression Anxiety 5 to 1 benefit  to cost ratio   for scaling up  treatment for  depression and anxiety  101 Chapter 4 Benefits of change

TABLE 4.4  Investing in mental health delivers significant returns CASE STUDY MODELLED BENEFITS OF INVESTMENT   JAMAICA Investment: US$ 115 million  to scale up treatment for  depression, anxiety and  psychosis 2015–2030 •	 Increased coverage of psychosocial treatment from 15% to 50%. •	 Overall benefits of more than US$ 434 million to the economy,  including productivity gains and the value of wider social benefits. •	 Return on investment of more than five to one for clinical treatment  of anxiety and depression.   PHILIPPINES Investment: US$ 2.7 billion  (US$ 2.57 per capita per  year) for integrated package  of promotion, prevention  and care over ten years •	 Universal school-based social and emotional learning interventions  to prevent depression and suicide are predicted to have the highest  return on investment, resulting in US$ 9.5 for every US$ 1 invested. •	 Other predicted high return investments include scaled-up  treatment of epilepsy (6.6 to 1) and depression (5.3 to 1).   SOUTH AFRICA Investment: 9% of projected  budget in 2035 to scale up  interventions for common  and severe mental health  conditions, epilepsy,  dementia, and alcohol and  drug use disorders •	 Highest returns predicted for scaled-up treatment of perinatal,  adult and childhood depression, with returns of 4.7, 4 and 3.6  respectively. •	 By the end of the scale-up period, approximately 2.2 million years  of healthy life would be restored, with close to 2.5 million prevalent  cases averted and more than [PHONE_REDACTED]deaths avoided. •	 Overall savings for psychosis and dementia did not exceed costs of  scale up, but health and human rights benefits were enormous.   UZBEKISTAN Investment: US$ 398  million 2021–2030 to  scale up evidence-based  interventions for common  and severe mental health  conditions as well as  epilepsy and alcohol use  disorders •	 Projected benefits of US$ 382 million in restored productivity plus  improvements in health itself that were valued at US$ 701 million. •	 Scaled-up treatment of epilepsy, treatment of depression, and  universal, school-based social and emotional learning interventions  to prevent depression and suicide, offer the highest returns on  investment in terms of restored productivity, and a gain of US$ 8.7,  3.4, 3.0 respectively, for every US$ 1 invested. Sources: PAHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]; WHO Regional Office for the Western Pacific, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Besada et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; WHO Regional Office for Europe, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 102 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

5 Foundations  for change FRAMEWORKS KNOWLEDGE AND COMMITMENT  FINANCE COMPETENCIES

Chapter summary In this chapter we explore foundations for change towards improved  mental health. We focus on four particular components required to  secure well-functioning mental health systems and services: effective  policy and planning frameworks; public and political knowledge  and commitment; sufficient finance and resources, and widespread  competencies for mental health care. This chapter also highlights the  growing role of digital technologies in strengthening mental health  systems and services. Key messages from this chapter are: Key targets for transformation include:  plans and policies; leadership and  governance; information systems and  research; finance; public awareness; and  competencies in mental health care. Global instruments, ranging from  joint action plans to legally binding  conventions, are critical to guide  action on mental health and provide an  enabling context for transformation. Three types of political commitment –  expressed, institutional and budgetary – are  needed to drive the mental health agenda  forward and effect meaningful change. People with lived experience are important  agents of change to improve public   awareness of mental health and acceptance  of people with mental health conditions.   Including psychosocial interventions  and psychotropic medicines in UHC  packages of essential services and  financial protection schemes is vital to  close the mental health care gap.  All countries need to expand their  specialist workforce and build mental  health care competencies among general  health care and community providers as  well as individuals in the community. Digital technologies can strengthen  mental health systems by providing tools  to inform and educate the public, train  and support health care workers, deliver  remote care, and enable self-help. 104 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

Chapter 4 Benefits of change provided the case for  transforming mental health systems, highlighting  the potential benefits to be gained. Pockets of  progress achieved over the past decade prove  that change is possible. The Comprehensive  mental health action plan 2013–2030 provides  a roadmap for action by all stakeholders. In many ways, transforming mental health is  about system strengthening: ensuring that each  of the core components of a mental health system  are fit for purpose. A well-functioning mental  health system is built on having trained and  motivated mental health workers, well-functioning  information systems, and a reliable supply of  medical products and technologies, backed  by adequate funding, strong leadership and  evidence-based plans and policies (229). Strengthening mental health systems provides  the foundations for change. It enables reorganization and scaling up of services and supports. In  the sections that follow, we consider what it will  take to secure four key foundations for change:  effective policy and information frameworks,  public and political understanding and  commitment, sufficient finance and resources, and  widespread competencies for mental health care. 5.1 Frameworks for policy and practice National and international policy frameworks  are used to set out countries’ principles,  values and objectives for mental health;  and they serve to help transformation. 5.1.1 International  frameworks Various international frameworks – ranging  from joint agendas and action plans to political  declarations and legally binding conventions  – have been developed and are being used to  guide action on mental health. These include  regional frameworks such as: Scaling up mental  health care: a framework for action, which was  adopted by the 68th Regional Committee for the  Eastern Mediterranean in 2015; the 2021–2025  European Framework for Action on Mental Health,  adopted by the 71st Regional Committee for  Europe in 2021; and forthcoming frameworks  by WHO’s African Region, WHO’s Western Pacific  Region and WHO’s Region for the Americas. International frameworks also include global  instruments, such as the Comprehensive mental  health action plan 2013–2030, which provides a  roadmap to transforming mental health globally  and is central to WHO’s work (3). Updated in  2019, this plan is structured around four key  objectives (see Chapter 1 Introduction). It outlines  actions for Member States, WHO and partners  and sets out diverse options for how such  actions could be implemented. Delivering on the  action plan targets would go a considerable way  towards improving mental health worldwide. Delivering on the Comprehensive  mental health action plan 2013–2030  would go a considerable way towards  improving global mental health. Another key global framework is the CRPD,  which came into force in 2008. Ratified by  182 countries, the CRPD is a legally binding  convention to promote, protect and ensure  the full and equal enjoyment of all human 105 Chapter 5 Foundations for change

BOX 5.1 International instruments for human rights Human rights instruments adopted by UN Member  States with relevance to the rights to mental  health and the rights of people with mental health  conditions include: •	 Universal Declaration on Human Rights (1948); •	 International Covenant on Economic, Social and  Cultural Rights (1966); •	 International Covenant on Civil and Political  Rights (1966); •	 Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of  Discrimination against Women (1979); •	 Protection of Prisoners and Detainees against  Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading  Treatment or Punishment (1982); •	 Convention against Torture and other  Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or  Punishment (1987); •	 Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989); •	 ILO Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention  (1989); •	 United Nations Rules for the Protection of  Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty (1990); •	 The United Nations Principles of Older Persons  (1991); •	 Declaration on the Elimination of Violence  against Women (1993); and •	 Convention on the Rights of Persons with  Disabilities (2006). Source: OHCHR, [PHONE_REDACTED]. TOOL 106 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

rights for people with disabilities, including  psychosocial disabilities (see section 4.2  Promoting and protecting human rights). Various other global human rights instruments  also promote the rights of people with mental  health conditions, both directly and indirectly  (see Box 5.1 International instruments for  human rights). Together, these international  instruments provide powerful tools for legal and  social advocacy to transform mental health. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,  and its 17 SDGs, is another important global  framework for mental health (231). SDG3  focuses specifically on health and includes  target 3.4 to reduce by one third premature  mortality from NCDs through prevention and  treatment, and to promote mental health  and well-being. Suicide mortality rate is an  indicator for this target (indicator 3.4.2). A major implication of SDG3 for mental health  policy and practice is a requirement for a strong  public health approach to the needs of those  with mental health conditions. But, as detailed  by the Lancet Commission on Global Mental  Health and Sustainable Development, the  SDGs provide a broader framework for transforming mental health because many other  SDGs explicitly address the social and structural  determinants of mental health (see section 4.3  Enabling social and economic development) (15). Just as the links between development priorities  and mental health are increasingly acknowledged, so too are the links between mental  health and other health priorities. In 2018 UN  heads of state and governments signed a political  declaration on the prevention and control  of NCDs (covering cardiovascular diseases,  diabetes, cancer and chronic respiratory  diseases) that acknowledges the bidirectional  links between these NCDs and mental health  conditions (232). Accordingly, it provides a  new level of political commitment to also  prioritize mental health when implementing  the NCD agenda. It also provides new impetus  to manage mental health conditions alongside  NCDs, both within primary health care and  within specific NCD programmes (see section  7.2 Mental health integrated in health services). Universal health coverage (UHC) for  mental health UHC means that everyone everywhere can get  the health care they need without suffering  financial hardship. Achieving UHC by 2030 is  one of the SDGs. Importantly, UHC does not  mean free access to every possible health  service for every person. Every country has a  different path to achieving UHC and deciding  what to cover, based on their people’s needs  and the resources at hand. UHC does however  emphasize the importance of access to health  services and information as a basic human right. In 2019, the UN General Assembly made  specific mention of “people with mental  health problems” in its resolution on UHC  (233). That same year, with the launch of the  WHO Special Initiative for Mental Health, WHO  firmly embedded mental health into its own  strategic efforts to expand UHC (see Box 5.2  WHO Special Initiative for Mental Health). Embedding mental health in  UHC is critical to close the huge  mental health care gap that  exists in many countries. Embedding mental health in UHC is critical to  close the huge mental health care gap that exists  in many countries. And it is a fundamental step  on the road to mental health reform. In practice,  it comprises activities to include mental health  needs in parity with physical health needs in all  plans and processes developed to achieve UHC. 107 Chapter 5 Foundations for change

CASE STUDY BOX 5.2 WHO Special Initiative for Mental Health In 2019, the WHO Special Initiative for Mental Health  was established to accelerate access to mental  health services through UHC. The goal is to ensure  100 million more people have access to quality and  affordable mental health care. The initiative will initially be implemented in 12  countries to demonstrate what is possible. Eight  countries have already been selected: Bangladesh,  Ghana, Jordan, Nepal, Paraguay, Philippines,  Ukraine and Zimbabwe. In each country, the Special  Initiative will be anchored in two broad types of  strategic action: •	 advancing mental health policies, advocacy and  human rights; and •	 scaling up interventions and services  across community-based, general health  and specialist settings. Importantly, the initiative takes a case-by-case  approach to embedding mental health in UHC  and mental health reform, using detailed country  assessments and consultations to develop a plan that  builds on existing strengths and responds to national  priorities so that support can be targeted where it is  needed most. Ministries of Health are supported to  lead national-level transformation with emphasis on  scaling up services to districts and regions. In this way,  the initiative hopes to secure sustainable scale up. Priorities across several countries focus on the  building blocks for health system strengthening,  for example governance, access to services and  information systems. Some countries, such as  Paraguay, are also focusing their efforts on the  mental health aspects of COVID-19 recovery. Source: WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]. This means including both social and psychological interventions, as well as basic medicines, for  mental health conditions in UHC basic packages  of essential services and financial protection  schemes (see section 5.1.3 Evidence to inform  policy and practice). It means ensuring that  mental health care is available and accessible  through a broad range of health and social care  services, including primary health care (235).  And it means expanding training throughout the  health care system to ensure staff are competent  to deal with mental health conditions. 5.1.2 National policy and  legislative frameworks Global frameworks are important and useful in  directing efforts to improve mental health. But  ultimately it is national policies, plans and laws  that shape local action on mental health and  enable change. At this level, governments have  the lead responsibility to develop and implement  frameworks to meet all the mental health needs  in their country, to protect the rights of those  with mental health conditions, and to promote  the mental health and well-being of all. 108 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

According to WHO’s Mental health atlas 2020,  the number of countries with established  policies, plans and laws in place for mental  health is steadily growing (see section 3.3.2  The governance gap) (5). These are important  to articulate clear objectives for mental health  and to direct practice and implementation. Mental health legislation that complies with  international human rights instruments,  whether independent or integrated into other  laws, is specifically needed to protect and  promote human rights, for example by establishing legal and oversight mechanisms and  enabling the development of accessible health  and social services in the community. Human rights-oriented laws and policies are  needed to guide transformation in mental  health, including shifting from institutional to  community-based services. They protect against  discrimination and abuse. They emphasize the  importance of liberty and enable dedicated  community-based mental health services –  such as community mental health centres or  mental health teams – to be developed and  to function, so that those with mental health  conditions can avoid hospitalization in custodial  institutions. And they can help ensure mental  health is included within primary care and  other priority health programmes and partnerships, for example for HIV/AIDS, women’s  health, children and adolescent health, communicable and noncommunicable diseases. Given the multisectoral nature of mental health  determinants, and the importance of mental  health programmes in areas such as education,  employment, disability, the judicial system,  human rights protection, social protection,  poverty reduction and development it is essential  that laws and policies aimed at improved mental  health should be developed beyond the health  sector. This includes, for example, developing  legislation to protect children from abuse or  to protect workers’ rights to mental health. In all cases, identifying and involving  stakeholders in the development of mental  health laws and policies is important  to ensure they are fit for purpose. Detailed plans of how laws and policies will  be implemented are vital. This means: •	 establishing timeframes for developing and  delivering specific elements of the law and policy;  •	 allocating budgets; •	 estimating human resource needs (both  specialist and non-specialist) and making a plan  for how these will be trained and placed; •	 identifying all activities that need to be done  and establishing clear roles and responsibilities  for each one; and •	 establishing how monitoring and evaluation will  be done to assess progress and performance  (including on rights compliance) and to enable  continuous improvement. WHO suggests setting up a functional mental health  unit or coordination mechanism in the ministry of  health, with an allocated budget and responsibility  for strategic planning (including situational analysis,  needs assessment and inter-ministerial and multisectoral coordination and collaboration) to help  ensure the development and implementation of  effective national policy and legal frameworks (3). 5.1.3 Evidence to inform  policy and practice Relevant and reliable information and research  are needed to ensure that transformative  policies, plans and evaluations for mental  health reform are informed by evidence. Making a case for investing in mental health relies  in part on having evidence that mental health  conditions are prevalent and pose a serious threat  to public health (see Box 5.3 WHO World Mental  Health Surveys). Putting evidence into context is  109 Chapter 5 Foundations for change

TOOL particularly important. National and local data on  the impact of mental health conditions on health,  education, employment, welfare and other sectors,  and the effectiveness of community-based care  can help place the case for investment within  relevant political contexts that drive policy-makers  to act (see section 4.3.2 Economic benefits) (236).  In Belize, for example, evidence on the specific  problems in the national mental health system, and  on the effective strategies available for overcoming  them, was a key factor in persuading policy-makers  and donors to back a radical reform of mental  health services in the country over 20 years (237). In addition to robust data on the prevalence  and impact of mental health conditions,  evidence that there are effective solutions  is essential to counter misconceptions that  investing in mental health is not worthwhile. The UHC Compendium In every area of health, but perhaps especially  in mental health – where resources are usually  scarce – it is essential that every intervention  is backed by evidence, grounded in analyses of  carefully chosen and collected routine data, and  sensitive to cultural contexts and local conditions. BOX 5.3 WHO World Mental Health Surveys For more than 20 years, WHO World Mental Health  Surveys Initiative has coordinated and carried out  rigorous general population epidemiologic surveys to  provide information on the global prevalence, burden  and unmet need for treatment of mental disorders;  and to support policy decisions. The initiative operates in 29 countries that, when  combined, represent all regions of the world and  include a total sample size of more than [PHONE_REDACTED]. All  surveys use a common methodology that includes  a WHO structured diagnostic interview to assess  conditions and treatment, consistent interviewer  training and procedures, and standard quality  control protocols. The World Mental Health Surveys have been variously  used to estimate the prevalence of mental disorders,  evaluate risk factors, study patterns of and barriers to  service use, and validate estimates of disease burden.  Together, they have been crucial in establishing  that mental disorders are very common around the  world. In almost all cases, they have given countries  their first ever national representative data on the  epidemiology of mental disorders. Sources: Harvard University, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Demyttenaere et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Kessler et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 110 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

WHO guidelines and recommendations identify a  range of interventions for managing mental health  conditions, whose efficacy and appropriateness  has been established through systematic reviews  of the best available evidence and consideration  of values, preferences, and feasibility issues  from an international perspective (241). •	 Psychosocial interventions involve  interpersonal or informational activities,  techniques, or strategies to improve health  functioning and well-being (242). For mental  health, these include psychoeducation, stress  management (including relaxation training  and mindfulness), emotional or practical social  support (including psychological first aid),  and various other social and rehabilitative  activities, including peer support and supported  employment and housing (203). These also  include psychological treatments such as  behavioural activation, problem-solving  therapy, cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT),  interpersonal therapy (IPT) and eye movement  desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR). •	 Psychotropic medicines can, where  appropriate, be used to reduce the symptoms  of priority mental health conditions and  improve functioning. Psychotropic medicines  on the WHO model list of essential medicines  include medicines for psychosis, bipolar  disorder, anxiety disorders, depression and  obsessive-compulsive disorder (243). Based on extensive reviews of research, WHO  has compiled the UHC Compendium to help  countries decide what to include in UHC service  packages. This global repository includes more  than 3 500 evidence-based interventions across  all areas of health, including more than 200 health  actions for mental health conditions (179). Mental health actions listed in the compendium  address the spectrum of promotive, preventive,  diagnostic, curative, and rehabilitative  interventions. They are largely based on the  mhGAP Evidence Resource Centre, which contains  the background material, process documents,  and the evidence profiles and recommendations  for WHO guidelines for mental, neurological, and  substance use disorders (159). Most of the clinical  interventions listed in the compendium are  included in the widely used mhGAP Intervention  Guide (mhGAP-IG) for non-specialized health  care settings (see Box 5.4 mhGAP Intervention  Guide: eight steps in clinical practice). For many people living with  mental health conditions, being  able to choose and access  psychological treatment and other  psychosocial support is essential. Importantly, clinical recommendations  listed in the UHC Compendium and in the  mhGAP-IG include a mix of psychosocial  and pharmacological interventions. Too  often, discussions on mental health in UHC  coverage packages focus exclusively on  medicines. But for many people living with  mental health conditions, being able to also  choose and access psychological treatment  and other psychosocial support is essential. For each intervention and health action  listed in the UHC Compendium, information  is given on relevant health programmes,  life-course stage and SDG goals. Many of the mental health interventions in the  compendium are not only effective but also  cost–effective and are on the WHO menu of  cost–effective interventions for mental health  (see section 4.3.2 Economic benefits) (222). In practice, the choice of intervention and how  it is implemented should be based on the type  of mental health problem being experienced  and, in the case of children and adolescents,  on the developmental stage of the person  experiencing it. And even though mental health 111 Chapter 5 Foundations for change

TOOL BOX 5.4 mhGAP Intervention Guide: eight steps in clinical practice Priority mental, neurological and substance use  conditions currently targeted by WHO’s mhGAP are:  depression, psychosis (including schizophrenia and  bipolar disorder), epilepsy, dementia, disorders  due to alcohol or drug use, child and adolescent  mental and behavioural disorders and conditions  related to stress (for example, PTSD) as well as  self-harm/suicide. For each of these, WHO has  developed (and continues to update) management  recommendations using the well-established  Grading of Recommendations Assessment,  Development and Evaluation (GRADE) method. The  recommendations cover both psychosocial and  pharmacological interventions. The mhGAP Intervention Guide (mhGAP-IG) turns  these evidence-based guidelines into simple clinical  protocols that can support decision making on the  ground in non-specialized health care settings.  Additionally, a broader programme of action builds  partnerships across all stakeholders to adapt and  adopt the protocols at scale. The mhGAP-IG describes the essentials of mental  health clinical practice, including assessing the  person’s physical health and assessing and managing  mental, neurological and substance use disorders. In  particular, it identifies eight steps in clinical practice. 1.	 Develop a treatment plan in collaboration with  the person and their carer. 2.	 Always offer psychosocial interventions for the  person and their carers. 3.	 Use pharmacological interventions when indicated. 4.	 Refer to a specialist or hospital when indicated  and available. 5.	 Ensure that an appropriate plan for follow up is  in place. 6.	 Work with carers and families to support the person. 7.	 Foster strong links with employment, education,  social services and other relevant sectors. 8.	 Modify treatment plans for special populations,  including children and adolescents, women who are  pregnant or breast-feeding and older adults. Sources: Dua, [PHONE_REDACTED]; WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 112 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

conditions exist on a continuum (see section 2.1.2  Mental health exists on a continuum), health care  providers need a diagnostic framework to clinically  assess, treat and ensure payment for the care of  mental health conditions. International Classification of Diseases,  11th Revision (ICD-11) Using medical nosology is important to ensure that  mental health is included in health statistics and  in health services planning and implementation.  For example, if a country is developing a UHC  basic package of services, it must be able to  list clearly defined mental health conditions to  decide what intervention to include for what  condition. And in many countries, both public  and private health insurance providers usually  require a diagnosis before covering the costs. WHO’s ICD-11 is the gold-standard global tool  for coding diseases, causes of death, injuries  and health conditions, informed by an extensive  review of the evidence (245). It includes a fully  revised chapter on mental, behavioural and  neurodevelopmental disorders that has been  designed to make mental health diagnoses more  accessible, also in non-specialist settings (246). Unlike most other diagnostic systems  in mental health, this ICD-11 chapter is  especially designed to ensure it is clinically  useful and globally applicable, in addition  to being valid and reliable (247). Mental health information systems Health management information systems,  including those for mental health, provide  valuable data on needs, services use and  resource demands. These can be used to track  trends and clusters of cases, identify at-risk  groups and measure mental health outputs and  outcomes (including coverage). They can also  be vital to inform service provision, resource  deployment and management guidelines (248). For mental health information systems to  be useful in informing policy and planning  and improving mental health outcomes: •	 the indicators must be relevant and feasible  to collect; •	 the data must be regularly reviewed and used to  identify trends; and •	 the health system must allow for practical changes  to be made on the basis of data collected. Where these conditions are manifest, health  information systems can enable decision-making  in all aspects of the health system and  ensure the delivery of equitable, effective,  efficient and good quality interventions. But despite an appetite for using information  systems to support decision-making around  service planning, this rarely happens in LMICs  (see Box 5.5 Mental health management  information systems in LMICs) (249). ICD-11 is designed to ensure  it is valid, clinically useful  and globally applicable. The Comprehensive mental health action plan  2013–2030 commits countries to strengthen  their surveillance systems for monitoring mental  health, self-harm and suicide. It suggests that  countries disaggregate data by facility, sex,  age, disability, method and other relevant  variables; and that they use these data to  inform plans, budgets and programmes. 113 Chapter 5 Foundations for change

CASE STUDY BOX 5.5 Mental health management information systems in LMICs A survey of mental health management information  systems in six African and Asian countries (Ethiopia,  India, Nepal, Nigeria, South Africa and Uganda)  found that all countries collected some mental  health indicators through their routine health  management information system, but that these  data were limited in scope and variable in their  categorization of mental health conditions. In general, the information systems surveyed focused  on reporting mental health diagnoses rather than  providing system level indicators on quality and  use of services. Where data on mental health were  collected and reported they took too long to reach  policy-makers to be able to influence decisions. Introducing a separate mental health information  system is unrealistic and undesirable in many  LMICs where mental health is still largely neglected  and resources remain in short supply. But routine  information systems can be strengthened to deliver  better quality mental health data. For example by  providing better support and training in mental  health information management, including  selecting relevant standardized indicators for  mental health. Source: Upadhaya et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. Research for mental health In addition to robust information systems,  evidence-based mental health policies and  services also require locally relevant research  that is timely, relevant, reliable, well-designed  and conducted, accessible and innovative. Various initiatives have established research  priorities for mental health at a global level.  For example, the 2011 Grand Challenges in  Global Mental Health, which established 25  research priorities for mental health involved  researchers, advocates, programme implementers  and clinicians from more than 60 countries  and was instrumental in directing substantial  research funding for mental health (251). Global prioritization initiatives for mental health  research such as the Grand Challenges highlight  the importance of research aimed at finding better  interventions, methods of care or even cures for  mental health conditions. But they also identify  other areas of importance, including research on:  the determinants of mental health; the prevalence  and global burden of mental health conditions;  the feasibility and affordability of interventions;  and the effectiveness and appropriateness of  different interventions in different contexts. At a national level, the Comprehensive mental  health action plan 2013–2030 emphasizes the  importance of developing a prioritized and funded  research agenda that is based on consultation  and cooperation with all stakeholders and  sectors; and that includes robust mechanisms  for translating knowledge into practice. 114 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

Of course, not all research is done to specifically  inform a given policy or with the intention of  being directly applied in practice. And it is often  the accumulation and replication of data that  eventually gets adapted and adopted into policy or  into clinical guidelines or recommendations, rather  than a single piece of research. Notwithstanding,  where research starts with the intention of practical  application, there is much that researchers can  do to support the translation of knowledge into  practice and guide mental health transformation. They can, for example, ensure that their research  reflects local and national realities. Data collected  for the Mental health atlas 2020 shows that less than  5% of health research outputs globally focused on  mental health; and most of that was concentrated  in high-income countries (see section 3.3.1 The  data gap). Addressing global research imbalances  and helping to close the data gap is important to  ensure LMICs have the information they need to  identify and target their own mental health needs  and priorities. That means conducting clinical  research in LMICs and ensuring a central role for  LMIC researchers in designing and managing the  research. It also means paying greater attention  to mental health systems research, rather than  basic or clinical research, to better understand  how to transform services so they meet the mental  health needs of all those who need care (252). Researchers can do much more to involve  people with lived experience in research design  and delivery. People with lived experience  and their organizations can facilitate global  networks for research collaboration. They can  help design and carry out culturally-validated  research. And they can help evaluate services  to ensure research is credible and genuinely  useful to service users and carers (253). Ensuring that mental health research evidence  can be put to use – including by policy-makers,  managers, clinicians and mental health planners  – is essential (254). Planning research collaboratively with stakeholders, sharing regular updates  and findings, assessing potential implications  and jointly considering how to use evidence  as it emerges, holds enormous potential for  translating knowledge into practice, including  by conducting implementation science. 5.2 Understanding and commitment Mental health is underserved for many different  reasons. One of the most important is that it tends  to be ignored and undervalued – by individuals,  families, businesses, communities and countries.  The result is that people at all levels of society and  government take insufficient action to promote  mental health, prevent mental ill-health, or to  provide comprehensive, rights-based, quality  care to those in need. A deep appreciation of  the real value of mental health is not in itself  enough to transform mental health; but it is  a fundamental step in the right direction. 5.2.1 Strengthening political  will and engagement Transforming mental health cannot be achieved  without reallocating limited resources,  developing new policies, building new skills,  establishing new partnerships and engaging  new stakeholders. In doing these things it is  common to encounter strong resistance to change,  driven, for example, by logistical challenges,  vested interests and competing priorities  (237). Strong political will and commitment  are essential to overcome the barriers. 115 Chapter 5 Foundations for change

Political will for an issue typically includes three  types of commitment: how widely decision-makers  publicly support the issue (expressed  commitment); the extent to which policies, plans  and programmes are established to implement  the stated intent (institutional commitment); and  whether or not the necessary funds are allocated  (budgetary commitment) (see Fig. 5.[PHONE_REDACTED]. All three types are needed to drive the mental  health agenda forward and effect meaningful  change. Indeed, a 2007 analysis of LMICs  suggested that many of the barriers to improved  mental health services could be overcome  by generating political will for accessible and  humane mental health care (252). Since then,  growth in global advocacy and action has focused  political attention on the need for quality mental  health care and built an appetite for change. Globally, expressed commitment is significantly  stronger than it was a decade ago. Institutional  commitment has similarly grown, with 146  countries now reporting stand-alone policies and  plans in place for mental health. But still, countries  remain reluctant to make change happen and  budgetary commitment is rare: only 67 countries  reported data on mental health spending in 2020  and those that did still only spent on average  2% of their total health budget on mental health  (see section 3.3.2 The governance gap) (5). Each type of political commitment can be  influenced by a range of national and international factors, including national leadership,  domestic advocacy, international public health  and development agendas, and public opinion.  In all countries, identifying and engaging  key agencies and stakeholders in the overall  process so that there is shared ownership of the  vision and its implementation is important. FIG. 5.1.  Political will is made up of three types of commitment  Source:  Fox et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. Public expressions of  support to mental health  by government leaders  and decision-makers. EXPRESSED COMMITMENT Establishment of the  policies, plans and  programmes needed to  realize the stated intent. INSTITUTIONAL COMMITMENT Allocation of the necessary  resources required to  implement the response. BUDGETARY COMMITMENT 116 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

In low-income countries, where mental health  budgets are particularly limited, there is  potentially also a catalytic role for external donors  in initiating and enabling a transformation in  mental health. And political will in source countries  as well as recipient ones can have a large influence  over whether or not international organizations  choose to invest in mental health in LMICs (256). All over the world, advocacy, evidence and  political context can also be hugely influential in  fostering political commitment and leadership. Advocacy movements Advocacy at all levels – global, regional,  national and within communities – is needed  to advance mental health policies and  practice. And at all levels, there are a growing  number of organizations that advocate for  better mental health policies, more financing  for mental health systems, and an end to  stigma and discrimination against people  living with mental health conditions. Advocacy at all levels is needed  to advance mental health  policies and practice. Advocacy also increasingly combines different  types of stakeholders to achieve change. Ensuring  representation from different stakeholders in  advocacy movements is important to their success  and is recommended by the Comprehensive  mental health action plan 2013–2030. WHO has developed guidance and works with a wide  variety of organizations to deliver successful mental  health advocacy (257). International institutions  can be key agents of change in encouraging and  supporting policy-makers to improve mental  health services, ensure equity in care and promote  human rights. Leading figures from these  organizations – such as the WHO Director-General  and the UN Secretary General – have a critical  role as champions for better mental health. Member States in global decision-making  bodies, such as the World Health Assembly  or the UN General Assembly, or in coalitions  of nations such as the G77, G20 or G7, can be  strong advocates among their peers to include  mental health in deliberations and to deliver  shared commitments to change (as expressed,  for example, in the Comprehensive mental  health action plan 2013–2030 or the UN political  declaration on NCDs). Mental health advocacy  by national governments is equally important in  influencing the policies and priorities of international organizations such as the World Bank  or Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB and Malaria. Mental health professionals and people with  lived experience of mental health conditions  have an important role in advocacy. Mental  health professionals can help influence  policy-makers and advance progress through  peer to peer influencing within and between  countries. And participation by people with  lived experience is important to help change  attitudes and build awareness about mental  health conditions, to articulate the value of  improved access to effective and humane mental  health care, and to provide peer support services,  among other things (read Sahar’s experience  and see Chapter 4, In focus: Engaging and  empowering people with lived experience) (23). Increasingly these stakeholders are joined  by other influential groups including  parliamentarians, businesses and media  and communications organizations who  also advocate for better mental health. More  broadly, a growing range of stakeholders are  acknowledging mental health as a cross-cutting  issue and working to better integrate it in  multisectoral services and programmes  targeted at, for example, improving physical  health, strengthening educational attainment,  upholding human rights, and supporting  people affected by conflict and disaster. 117 Chapter 5 Foundations for change

NARRATIVE Giving people hope is my  greatest pleasure  Sahar’s experience I was 16 when my life was turned upside down by an  invisible illness. I spent what should have been my  senior year in high school on a couch, too depressed  to move, eat, or think, in a maelstrom of internal  terror that I hoped would go away. It never did. I spent years living with an undiagnosed mental  illness. All I knew was I was hurting and terrified that  people would find out about my mental struggle.  I didn’t know anyone who was open about having  a mental illness. I turned to drugs and alcohol to  numb my pain. My life didn’t matter to me and I had a  suicide attempt. It has been eleven years since my world fell apart.  In that time I have been diagnosed with borderline  personality disorder, major depressive disorder, and  obsessive compulsive disorder. I have dealt with the  perils of addiction. Today I am taking prescribed  medication, attending therapy sessions, and putting  in the work be mentally healthy. Over those eleven years I also broke out of my  bubble of shame and realized that my illness was a  superpower I could use to help others. I cofounded a  non-profit organization aimed at bringing awareness  to mental health and used my story to create  awareness and help others. I am proud to be a mental  health advocate. Giving people hope by sharing my  story has been the greatest pleasure of my life. Maybe  that is what all the heart ache and suffering is for – to  help others. As much as my illness is a superpower I have days  where I am crippled by my illness. I am lucky to have  an incredible support system that helps me through  the darkness. This is not something I take for granted.  Many people have no support and no access to good  mental health care. They are left to suffer and in some  cases perish from something that is treatable. To move forward we must ensure that mental health  care is accessible to all. We must ensure that our kids  are taught that it is ok not to be ok and help is just  a conversation away. Mental illness is not a death  sentence nor a sign of weakness. My name is Sahar. I am a proud mentally ill teacher,  advocate, daughter, niece, friend, aunt, dog-mom,  and human, finding my way in the world like  everyone else. Sahar Vasquez, Belize 118 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

In all cases, ensuring consensus and clarity in  communications is important. Fragmentation  in advocacy, where different stakeholders argue  against each other to highlight different aspects  of mental health, has been identified as a major  barrier to progress (258). But overall, there has  been a rise in coordinated national and global  advocacy campaigns, events, forums and  platforms in recent years (for example, see Chapter  4, In focus: Engaging and empowering people with  mental health conditions). These can serve as  vehicles for strengthening political commitment.  For example, World Mental Health Day (celebrated  on 10 October each year) is increasingly used  all over the world to raise awareness of mental  health issues, garner public expressions of  commitment from national decision-makers and  mobilize efforts in support of mental health (259). Windows of opportunity Some political contexts offer particularly  favourable opportunities for securing commitment  from political leaders and moving the mental  health agenda forward. This includes, for  example, the launch of a landmark report or  international agreement. In 2001, the WHO  flagship report on mental health captured the  attention of political leaders all over the world  and provided the momentum for a number  of national and international mental health  initiatives to take root and flourish (237). Humanitarian emergencies and  natural disasters offer unparalleled  platforms for change to develop  better care systems for the long term. In the Americas, it was the signing of the Caracas  Declaration in 1990 that paved the way for  mental health reform. The declaration called  for mental health to be integrated into primary  care, and for the human rights of people with  mental health conditions to be protected. It was  informed by a combination of epidemiological studies that showed the extent of mental  ill-health in the region; but also political and  social innovation following the end of several  dictatorships. It provided the basis for policy  and legislative initiatives and successful and  innovative reform in many countries, including  Brazil, Chile, Cuba, El Salvador, Guatemala,  Nicaragua and Panama, among others (260). Humanitarian emergencies arising from natural  disasters and conflict, despite their tragic  nature and adverse effects on mental health,  offer unparalleled platforms for change. They  represent an obligation and opportunity for  countries to invest in mental health. A surge of  national and international aid, combined with  sudden, focused attention on people’s mental  health, can galvanize political support and  action and create opportunities for developing  better care systems for the long term. In Syria, for example, before the conflict, there was  scarcely any mental health care available outside  the psychiatric hospitals in Aleppo and Damascus.  Now, thanks to a growing recognition of the  need for support, and increasing humanitarian  aid, mental health and psychosocial support  has been introduced in primary and secondary  health facilities, in community and women’s  centres, and in school-based programmes.  Today, despite the ongoing conflict, at least  one of every four functioning general health  care facilities in Syria has one person trained  in mental health, who is supervised and works  within a system to provide mental health care. Many countries have already capitalized on  emergency situations to build better mental health  systems (261). For example, in Sri Lanka, the  impacts of the Asian tsunami in 2004 dramatically  increased the political interest in mental health  and facilitated the mobilization of immediate  resources for emergency mental health care,  which then provided a platform for broader  national mental health reform. Supported by  WHO, the Sri Lankan Ministry of Health worked  119 Chapter 5 Foundations for change

with stakeholders to develop a national mental  health policy focused on decentralizing care  and ensuring the local availability of mental  health services in all districts of the country.  The plan was implemented through multiple  programmes at national and district levels.  Today, every district in the country has mental  health services infrastructure, compared with  a third before the tsunami (see Fig. 5.2). FIG. 5.2  The expansion of mental health services in Sri Lanka, 2004–2021  Source: Ministry of Health Sri Lanka et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Directorate of Mental Health, Sri Lanka, unpublished data, June 2022. SERVICES [PHONE_REDACTED]Acute inpatient units Outpatient clinics at  hospitals Intermediate care  rehabilitation unit Alcohol rehabilitation  centres Outreach clinics Child mental health clinics  in general hospitals  Child mental health units Mental health helpline [PHONE_REDACTED]Psychiatrists Child psychiatrists Forensic psychiatrists Medical oﬀicers of  mental health (MOMH) Medical oﬀicers with one  year diploma in psychiatry Psychiatric nurses Psychiatric social workers Occupational therapists Community support oﬀicers Speech therapists [PHONE_REDACTED]HUMAN  RESOURCES Very basic or no mental  health services Basic mental health services Comprehensive mental  health services [PHONE_REDACTED]World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

In Albania, the 1999 crisis of refugees from Kosovo1  created an interest in mental health and  an appetite  – backed with finances – for mental health reform.  A new mental health plan was approved and  services were decentralized from a hospital-only and  biologically-oriented system of care to a wide range  of community-based services (see Fig. 5.3). FIG. 5.3 Change in mental health facilities in  Albania 2000–2020  Source: Ministry of Health, Albania, unpublished data, March 2022. Most recently, the COVID-19 pandemic has made  strengthening mental health systems more urgent  all over the world, but especially in LMICs. It has  prompted swift and diverse responses through,  for example, national COVID-19 response plans  for mental health services, implementation of  WHO and Inter-agency Standing Committee (IASC)  1 The reference to Kosovo in this report should be understood to be in the context of the United Nations Security Council  resolution [PHONE_REDACTED]. guidance and a WHO Executive Board decision  urging Member State action on, and resources  for, mental health (see Chapter 2, In focus:  COVID-19 and mental health) (7, 263). Building on  the growing interest in using new technologies  in mental health care over recent years, the  pandemic has also spurred development and  deployment of a swathe of digital tools and  tactics to support mental health in the face of  deep uncertainty, stress and change (see In focus:  Harnessing digital technologies for mental health). Whether it is a new report, a change in government,  a disaster or a public health emergency, all opportunities must be used to transform mental health. 5.2.2 Building public  awareness and interest Building public awareness and interest is essential  to transform and scale mental health care. Mental  health is everybody’s business. Intrinsic to our  quality of life and our potential for prosperity,  it is something that all people should value for  themselves and others. If the general public does  not know about or is not interested in mental health  issues, they are less likely to take responsibility  for self-care, to seek appropriate help when  they aren’t well, or to prioritize access to quality  mental health care for all (see section 3.4.2 Low  levels of health literacy about mental health).  Governments are also unlikely to invest in mental  health promotion or commit to mental health care  reform if the general public is not knowledgeable  and interested in mental health issues. Building public interest in mental health, shifting  attitudes and tackling stigma is not easy. But  experience shows it is possible, most notably  through education, contact and protest anti-stigma  strategies such as those outlined in section 4.2.1  Stopping stigma. Approaches based on social  contact with people with mental health conditions Community mental  health centres Inpatient wards in  general hospitals Residential facilities [PHONE_REDACTED]Community mental  health teams  [PHONE_REDACTED]FOR ADULTS FOR CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS Psychiatric hospitals [PHONE_REDACTED]INSTITUTIONAL  CARE 121 Chapter 5 Foundations for change

NARRATIVE Knowledge is power Angelica’s experience In my country there are 17 psychiatrists for 16 million  people. The mental health budget is very small and  conditions like mine – obsessive compulsive disorder  (OCD) – are simply ignored. For years I thought that maybe I was bewitched,  or cursed, or possessed by evil spirits. I had to go  through this alone, because of fear of stigmatization.  I could not even tell my husband. I was scared my  loved ones would desert me. My church could not  help. No priest understood what I was going through.  There were no support groups in the whole country. I finally found out about OCD online. Even then it  took me nearly a year to get the courage to visit a  health care worker. I remember once telling a friend  that the government was letting people with OCD  down because no one was talking about it. They  replied that we only have ourselves to blame: we  need to speak up. In 2018 I set up a nongovernmental organization called  Zimbabwe OCD Trust to raise awareness of and provide  support to people with OCD. I started a support group.  We used to meet face-to-face once a month before  COVID-19; now we meet online. I gave talks on the  radio and at local events. Our work was featured in  newspapers and magazines. People started to notice  me, they started listening to what I was saying and then  they started coming forward and inviting me to talk  about this highly stigmatized disorder. Knowledge is power. Just knowing that their distress  was caused by a mental health condition and not  some evil spirit was a relief to most people. I am  not a psychiatrist, so once someone is comfortable  talking about their disorder I ask them to seek  professional help. I feel that this is just the beginning of my work in  raising awareness of OCD, ending stigma towards it  and supporting people with lived experience to be  treated as equal partners in this world. Angelica Mkorongo, Zimbabwe 122 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

BOX 5.6 VISHRAM: a community initiative to reduce suicides in rural India The Vidarbha Stress and Health Program (VISHRAM)  was a community-based programme run over 18  months in 2014 and 2015. It was designed to address  the mental health risk factors for suicide in the rural  Amravati district of Vidarbha, central India. By the end  of the project, the prevalence of suicidal thoughts  among VISHRAM’s target population had halved, and  the prevalence of depression had fallen by 22%. There  was also a six-fold increase in the percentage of people  seeking mental health care. VISHRAM used a tiered model of collaborative care,  in which community health workers provided the  first point of contact. They visited households and  held small meetings to increase awareness of mental  health conditions and the services available to  treat them. They also helped identify people with  symptoms of depression, persuading them to talk  to a lay counsellor for psychological first aid; or,  for people with more severe symptoms, to visit an  outreach clinic and see a psychiatrist. As a legacy of VISHRAM, each of the 30 villages  involved in the programme has a community health  worker who is trained to detect depression, provide  frontline support and refer people to the public  health system for further management. The increased  awareness among community members also  triggered 26 village councils to pass resolutions to the  State Government demanding mental health services. Source: Shidhaye et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. CASE STUDY are particularly effective. People with lived  experience, including in peer-led organizations,  can be important agents of change. They can  increase awareness and acceptance among the  general public and so build health literacy in  mental health (read Angelica’s experience). In practice, awareness-building programmes can  vary widely from country to country, reflecting  differences in culture, context and resources  available. In many cases they are embedded in  other community-based mental health services and  infrastructure designed to increase the demand  for care  (see Box 5.6 VISHRAM: a community  initiative to reduce suicides in rural India).  Improving awareness and help-seeking is a key  requirement to scale up much needed mental  health care. If people do not know that some of  their mental health difficulties can be addressed by  locally available services, they will not seek care. Awareness building also includes proactive case  detection. Research in rural Nepal showed that  community volunteers trained to use a vignette  and picture based case detection tool can identify  people with mental health conditions and so  inform them about available care (265). The  Nepal study found that proactive community  case detection led to nearly 50% more people  starting mental health care compared with  general awareness-raising and self-referral. 123 Chapter 5 Foundations for change

IN FOCUS Harnessing digital technologies  for mental health Digital technologies – from websites and online platforms to smartphones and mobile  applications – have long been able to help people achieve better mental health  (266). But until recently it has mostly been people in higher-income countries using  them. Now, these technologies are becoming more available and affordable in many  countries and settings, and they are increasingly being harnessed to improve mental  health, especially in remote areas where people are more likely to have access to a  mobile phone than mental health care. This trend was amplified during the COVID-19 pandemic as service users and providers  searched for ways to deliver and access mental health care amid social restrictions. Of course, digital technologies for mental health are not without their risks. In all  cases, digital interventions should be guided by ethical principles and implemented  in line with professional codes of conduct. Key areas of concern are: privacy, data  protection, safety and accountability (267). Availability and fairness are also important  issues, especially as many people – especially those with fewer resources – may not  be able to access digital technologies (see section 3.3.3 The resources gap: a digital  divide). And digital technologies more broadly can adversely impact mental health. Various  studies suggest that exposure to social media in particular has been linked with  mental health conditions in young people (although there are caveats due to  methodological limitations in the research). Time spent online, types of activities and  addictive use have all been associated with depression, anxiety and psychological  distress in adolescents. Extensive screen time and frequent use of digital technology may possibly heighten  attention-deficit symptoms, disrupt sleep, and hinder brain development (268, 269).  They can lead to technology addiction and social isolation. Gaming disorder, which is  a new condition in ICD-11, is an increasing concern (270). It is more common among  men than women and it can result in marked distress and significant impairment in  personal, family, social, educational or occupational functioning.   Overall, digital technologies have the potential to contribute substantially to  national efforts to achieve universal mental health coverage. They reduce travel  time and expense. They provide flexibility to fit around people’s daily schedules.  And their anonymity can help avoid barriers created by stigma. Indeed, the  evidence for digital approaches supporting mental health is compelling, with  self-help approaches and telemedicine in particular showing strong benefits,  including in middle-income countries (271). 124

The sections that follow describe five areas of great  promise, where digital technologies are already being  used to effectively improve the availability, reach and  quality of mental health care (we have not considered  their use in mental health information systems). The examples provided are far from exhaustive:  this is a fast-evolving field and new approaches and  applications are constantly emerging. Digital technologies to inform  and educate the public Having information about mental health and how to  deal with one’s own mental health can be extremely  useful to people experiencing psychological distress  or living with a mental health condition; or indeed to  anyone who simply wants to improve their well-being. WHO online resources. WHO provides extensive  digital resources to the public through various media  including videos, booklets, manuals and webpages  (272). Key topics include: managing stress, mental  health during COVID-19, dealing with depression, and  preventing suicide. Global experts by experience. The Global Mental  Health Peer Network publishes podcasts, interviews,  academic papers and online articles to share  information aimed at empowering people with  lived experience (273). By sharing recovery stories,  the network hopes to help break down stigma and  remind others that recovery is possible. Health literacy in China. In response to a rise  in mental health problems during the COVID-19  pandemic, mental health professionals and health  authorities in China developed a range of online  mental health education and awareness programmes  (274). These include using social media to provide  information to medical staff and the public; and  free e-books to educate people about COVID-19  prevention, control, and mental health. Digital technologies to train  health care workers Across multiple settings, WHO and other institutions  use e-learning courses with remote support and  supervision to train health care workers in various  aspects of mental health care, including clinical  management, rights-based care (see Box 4.4  WHO QualityRights), and delivering psychological  interventions (see Box 5.12 EQUIP: assessing  and building competencies for psychological  interventions). WHO Academy. Using a mix of online, in-person  and blended learning programmes, the WHO  Academy plans to expand access to learning for  health workers, managers, public health officials,  educators, researchers and policy-makers around  the world. When it opens, it will offer training on all  aspects of global health, including mental health.  The academy will offer multilingual, personalized  programmes featuring innovations such as artificial  intelligence and virtual reality technology. All  courses will be suitable for low-bandwidth settings.  Both mhGAP and QualityRights core training  packages for primary health care workers will be  available through the new academy. EMPOWER. EMPOWER is an online, interactive  training programme that teaches supervised  community health workers to deliver mental health  interventions for different conditions. It is being  simultaneously developed in India and the United  States. The programme is digitizing the content of  existing, evidence-based, psychosocial treatments  that have been shown to be effective when delivered  by non-specialists. Online learning will involve digital  leaning, a remote coach, peer supervision moderated  by an expert and competency assessment (275). Virtual Campus for Public Health (VCPH). VCPH  is the learning platform of the Pan American Health  Organization (PAHO) (276). Through the VCPH, health  practitioners can access online courses and interactive  materials on a variety of public health topics, including  125 Chapter 5 Foundations for change

public mental health topics such as prevention of  self-harm and suicide, mental health and psychosocial  support in humanitarian emergencies, and stigma  reduction. The platform includes content in four  languages, contributed from 21 countries across the  Americas. The VCPH has supported public health  training since 2008 and now has more than a million  people enrolled in its courses (277). Digital technologies to support  non-specialist providers Digital tools can help non-specialist providers to assess  mental health conditions and provide treatment. Electronic mhGAP Intervention Guide  (e-mhGAP-IG). The original mhGAP-IG provides  clinical protocols to support non-specialist providers  in assessing and managing priority mental health  conditions. The mobile tool offers the same materials,  reformulated for use with a smart phone and available  in several languages. e-health in Afghanistan. In Afghanistan, an e-health  initiative in Badakhshan province supported  community health workers and facility-based health  care providers through a tailor-made mobile application  (278). Like the e-mhGAP-IG, the Afghan application  included interactive mhGAP-based guidelines for  screening and management. It could also register  mental health service users in the community and  provided a platform for teleconsultation. Preliminary  evaluation suggested remote communities had  enhanced access to care, stigma was reduced, and the  quality of health services improved. Digital technologies for  remote care Tele-mental health is a way of putting service users  and mental health professionals in touch remotely.  Sessions held through videoconferencing, online  messaging or by telephone enable the professional to  make evaluations, provide therapy (individual, group  or family therapy), prescribe medication, educate  about mental health and support self-management.  Research shows that psychological treatment through  videoconferencing can be particularly useful in  treating depression and anxiety (279). Tele-mental health can also involve mental health  professionals supporting pharmacists to deliver  prescriptions or primary care providers to deliver  consultations, either live or using a record-and-forward  format in which information is pre-recorded and sent  for review. Or it can involve providing advice and  guidance remotely. In remote rural areas, tele-mental health may be  more convenient for logistical purposes. During the  COVID-19 pandemic it was the only practical option  available for most people (see Chapter 2, In focus:  COVID-19 and mental health). People often prefer  tele-mental health because it avoids the stigma of  attending a physical consultation and the time and  cost of travel to the appointment. Counselling through chat in China. During the  COVID-19 pandemic, mental health professionals  in medical institutions, universities and academic  societies across all regions of China established online  24-hour psychological counselling services through  free messaging applications (274). e-prescriptions in the Philippines. In the Philippines,  doctors used teleconsultations to liaise with  pharmacies and issue e-prescriptions as a way of  improving access to prescription medication during  COVID-19 lockdowns (280). Digital technologies for  self-help Self-help interventions have a strong evidence base,  especially for depression and anxiety (281). But when  it comes to digital self-help for mental health, there are  thousands of online and mobile applications available  and only a few have been well tested and evaluated.  Examples of well evaluated tools include Step-by-Step  126 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

(read Nour’s experience and see Box 7.7 Step-by-Step:  guided self-help for depression in Lebanon). Smartphones for stress management. In Viet Nam,  a smartphone-based stress management programme  has been found to improve work engagement among  hospital nurses. The programme was developed in  consultation with Vietnamese nurses to consider their  work cultures and stressors and was provided in two  formats: one where any module could be picked by the  user; and one where the modules had to be followed  in sequential order. The fixed-order programme, which  included CBT-based stress management skill training,  was found to significantly improve work engagement  at three-month follow up; but its effectiveness did not  endure at seven-month follow up (282). WHO Alcohol e-Health. WHO Alcohol e-Health is an  evidence-based interactive self-help tool for people  seeking to reduce or discontinue their use of alcohol.  Alcohol e-health has been tested in Belarus, Brazil,  India and Mexico, where it was found to reduce  harmful or hazardous alcohol use within six months,  suggesting that this could be an important model for  other LMICs to follow (283). NARRATIVE I can actually feel a difference Nour’s experience Since birth, I have suffered with brittle bone disease.  When I was young I went to a school that cares  about integrating children with special needs and I  did not feel different, although outside school I was  subjected to bullying that bothered me and made  me cry a lot. Then, in my last year of school, my family moved. My  new school did not even meet the lowest standards to  support people with my condition. I started skipping  school a lot and after years of being at the top of my  class, my grades started to drop. When I failed my exams  I experienced a great shock and I developed a constant  fear of failing. I started having more psychological  disturbances but did not have the awareness to express  myself or to ask help from anyone. I tried therapy but I couldn’t always afford the  fees. Then I found Step-by-Step on social media.  Step-by-Step is a free, online mental health  programme that gives me a space to express my  emotions and tools to help me overcome the  problems I face. At first I felt that the tools were not  that helpful, but using them again and again I can  actually feel a difference. Today I can express my mood when I need to and I  use tools like breathing and grounding exercises to  help me decrease my psychological pain. Through  Step-by-Step I have learned to get things done even  when I’m feeling down and powerless, by splitting  them up into simple tasks. Step-by-Step is also helping  me strengthen my social relationships. I feel that I  belong to a circle of support. And I have gained skills  that make me think more positively and gratefully. Nour Awad, Lebanon 127 Chapter 5 Foundations for change

5.3 Financing for mental health Strengthening information, evidence and understanding can only go so far in facilitating mental  health reform. To transform mental health  services, plans and policies must be translated into  action through financing that allocates resources  as and where they are needed. Adequate financing  provides the basis for establishing administration and governance mechanisms, developing  and deploying a trained workforce and installing  relevant infrastructure and technology to scale up  delivery of sustainable mental health services. Achieving adequate financing requires  policy-makers and planners to devote more  funds for mental health, either by getting  additional resources from the state treasury  or external funders, or by redistributing  resources towards mental health, both within  the health budget as well as across government  (for example in education budgets). Either way, budgetary restrictions and human  resource constraints invariably limit what is  possible. Achieving UHC requires rational and  carefully considered decisions about where,  how and to whom health services should be  provided. In all contexts, in-depth processes to  weigh up needs, resources, evidence of impact  and models of intervention can help ensure  that resources are allocated, and services  provided, appropriately and efficiently. Financial constraints have led to some  highly innovative solutions that use minimal  resources but achieve important outcomes.  Such innovations, borne of necessity, may  be the most favourable option in LMICs; they  may also provide models that are appropriate  for high-income countries. For example, both  Problem Management Plus and the Friendship  Bench involve brief, simplified versions of  psychological interventions that were originally  developed for LMIC communities but which  have now been adapted for use in New York  (see section 7.1.4 Scaling up care for people  with common conditions) (284, 285). Mental health services generally rely entirely on  health and social care budgets for resources.  Resource allocation tends to follow historical  convention rather than being based on ongoing  evaluation of need. Budgets are usually refocused  only when health care is being reformed. There are ways that countries can increase the  efficiency and equity of existing resources for  mental health services, including by deinstitutionalizing mental health care and by tackling  any misuse of resources. Nonetheless, no  country will be able to meet the mental health  needs of their populations without mobilizing  additional funds and human resources and  allocating increased amounts for mental health. No country will be able to meet  the mental health needs of their  populations without mobilizing  additional funds and human  resources for mental health. Most funding for mental health should come  from domestic sources, to ensure sustainability (219). But there is a role for external  funders, for example through direct assistance,  foreign direct investment, corporate social  responsibility or philanthropy (286). 128 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

CASE STUDY BOX 5.7 Peru: innovative financing for sustainable improvement Since 2013, a process of mental health reform in Peru  has been closing the care gap for people in need. The  reform is focused on shifting care for mental health  conditions from specialized psychiatric hospitals  to community-based care. Analysis suggests that  the reform has supported a gradual but significant  expansion in mental health services: in 2009, 9% of  people who needed care were covered; by 2018 this  figure had risen to 26%. The successful mental health reform in Peru would  not have been possible without an innovative  financing model to mobilize new resources and  leverage existing funding streams for mental health.  In 2014, the Ministry of Economy and Finance  approved a ten-year results-based budget exclusively  to support community-based mental health services.  By 2020, the number of community mental health  centres in the county had grown ninefold (see Box  7.13 Peru: comprehensive community-based mental  health care). Mental health services were included as part of  the benefits package offered under Peru’s national  health insurance scheme, which marked a crucial  step towards achieving mental health parity in the  health system. This was complemented by a revised  reimbursement fee schedule to cover the costs  of service provision at community mental health  facilities and specialized psychiatric hospitals. Combined, these measures helped reduce  individuals’ out-of-pocket payments for mental  health services by a third from 2013 to 2016. Sources: MINSA, [PHONE_REDACTED]; APEC, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 129 Chapter 5 Foundations for change

5.3.1 Increasing resources  from domestic sources for  mental health Domestic finance for mental health services can be  mobilized by advocating for funds from the state  treasury; or by reallocating resources within the  health budget. Either way, experience shows that  when countries commit to funding mental health  services themselves, transforming mental health  care is possible (see Box 5.7 Peru: innovative  financing for sustainable improvement). Sourcing additional finance for mental health  from the central resource pool through ministries  of finance or planning is attractive in that it does  not take funding from other areas of health. But  any request for additional funds from the treasury  also has to compete with requests from other  ministries, as well as from a wide range of other  organizations needing government assistance. As countries continue to orientate and finance the  move towards UHC, it is vital that mental health is  incorporated into sector-wide plans for responsive  and resilient health systems. The introduction  of new social health insurance schemes or other  health financing reforms needed for UHC provide  key opportunities for mental health to be “hard  wired” from inception. Beyond the health sector,  mental health should be fully considered as an  emerging development priority since it is linked  to poverty, social inequalities, migration, and  other key concerns (see section 4.3 Enabling  social and economic development). In this way,  mental health can be brought into development  strategies that inform treasury decisions, such  as medium-term budgetary frameworks. An alternative approach is to reallocate resources  within the health budget to increase the proportion  that goes to mental health. Constraints related  to budgetary limits and competing priorities  still apply. Beyond mental health, governments  have to decide how much to spend on communicable diseases, NCDs, and maternal and child  health, among other health needs. Each of these  areas of health may have valid and persuasive  arguments for keeping their current budgets or  even increasing them. Governments also have  to decide how much of the health budget should  be spent on primary care services, hospitals,  specialized services, and prevention and  promotion, all of which include mental health. As countries continue to cope with the economic  consequences of COVID-19, government  budgets all over the world are under severe  strain. The competition for resources is likely  to be as strong as ever, while the need to  rapidly scale-up mental health support for  affected populations is immense (see Chapter  2, In focus: COVID-19 and mental health). Expert opinion is divided on how much of  the health budget should be allocated to  mental health, with various proposals about  which criteria should be used to set health  priorities (289). Feasibility, affordability, cost– effectiveness, human rights and equity are all  important considerations. There is also the  need to understand broad health care financing  contexts, tie budgets to nationally-agreed  mental health goals and targets and use  financing as a tool to introduce innovations  and facilitate mental health reform (284). Whether or not countries adopt a specific target  percentage of the health budget to spend  on mental health, the road to UHC requires  sufficient resources to make quality affordable  care equally accessible for physical and mental  health care. This requires all sectors, not just  health, to allocate resources to mental health.  For example, people with mental health  conditions should have access to comprehensive support and employment programmes run  by social development and labour ministries. 130 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

TOOL BOX 5.8 Health4Life Fund on NCDs and mental health Health4Life Fund is a UN-wide multi-partner trust  fund devoted to NCDs and mental health that was  established in 2021 under the auspices of the United  Nations Inter Agency NCD Task Force. It is designed to support LMICs with catalytic  grants, in order to stimulate multi-stakeholder and  cross-sectoral action at country level, increase  domestic funding, and improve policies, legislation  and regulation. H4LF seeks to enable governments and civil society  to address national priorities and achieve scale  for innovative actions that strengthen the health  system. This includes implementing recommended  interventions for preventing and managing NCDs  and mental health conditions across the life-course  while enhancing a broader multisectoral response to  underlying social and structural determinants. Source: WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 5.3.2 External investors in  mental health Even if countries scale up domestic finance  for mental health services, external investors  still have an important role, for example, in  sourcing catalytic funds (see Box 5.8 Health4Life  Fund on NCDs and mental health). External resources are particularly important in  low-income countries, where budgetary pressures  are often greatest. In these countries, a large  and complex ecosystem of external investors  exists across the public, private and third  sectors, including aid agencies, development  banks, corporations, small- and medium-sized  enterprises, nongovernmental organization,  corporations and private foundations. External resources may also be important  for middle-income countries, especially  as they scale down institutional care and  temporarily require a “double budget” to build  up community mental health services. In many cases, external funding can successfully  catalyse positive change (see Box 5.9 Pakistan:  harnessing donor funding to spark change).  But although the level of external investment in  mental health has risen since 2000, its contribution remains limited. Mental health attracts very  little donor funding. (291). Philanthropic contributions are particularly important in funding  mental health improvements in LMICs, but  these are still marginal compared with external  investment in other areas of health (292). 131 Chapter 5 Foundations for change

BOX 5.9 Pakistan: harnessing donor funding to spark change Using a series of external grants since 2014,  Interactive Research and Development in  Pakistan has established and scaled up the  Pursukoon Zindagi (Peaceful Life) programme  to increase access to mental health services in  low-resource communities. The programme combines community engagement  and capacity building activities to increase  awareness of mental health conditions and  services. Its lay counsellors also provide brief  community-based psychological treatment, or  referrals. From 2018, the programme started  integrating its services within some primary  care networks, as well as within specific disease  programmes for TB, HIV, lung health and diabetes. By December 2019, the programme reported that  it had screened more than [PHONE_REDACTED]people for  anxiety and depression; and given free mental  health counselling to more than 9 000 people. It  now operates in 19 primary care centres, with more  than 140 lay counsellors trained and deployed in  communities. It plans to extend the model to three  additional primary care providers with a combined  network of 75 clinics in Karachi. When the programme started, lay counsellors were  grant funded; but after the programme’s success  the primary care facilities covered staff costs, so  ensuring sustainability. During COVID-19, the programme has also  trained lay counsellors to provide mental health  services through proactive calls to people tested  for COVID-19; has organized support groups  for frontline workers; and a crisis helpline for  anyone suffering from anxiety or depression. The  programme trained at least 25 health workers to  provide integrated physical and mental health care  remotely; and supported more than [PHONE_REDACTED]people. Sources: MHIN, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Innovations in Healthcare, [PHONE_REDACTED]. CASE STUDY 132 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

5.4 Competencies and human  resources Alongside evidence, understanding and funding,  widespread competencies in mental health are  a vital component of a well-functioning mental  health system. In tiered systems of care, diverse  providers adopt different but complementary roles  that use resources efficiently and make care more  widely available. This means that competencies in  mental health need to be achieved and maintained  by care providers at each tier, ranging from  individuals and community providers to general  and specialist health care workers (see Fig. 5.4). Mental health staff working in psychiatric hospitals  may have to learn how to work in community-based  settings. At the same time, primary care staff will  have to develop new skills in detecting mental  health conditions and providing care. A broad  range of providers who are not mental health  specialists, including community workers, lay  volunteers, teachers, police officers and prison  staff, similarly need specific skills to deliver basic  mental health interventions (295). Providers in all  settings, including both mental health specialists  and non-specialists, need to develop competencies to effectively support the social inclusion  of people living with mental health conditions  and ensure rights-based, person-centred,  recovery-oriented care and support. Beyond the mental health workforce, everyone  in the community has a role in reducing the  treatment gap by developing their individual skills  and competencies in understanding and looking  after their mental health, including managing their  own mental health conditions where possible. In comprehensive care systems, evidence shows  that task-sharing can improve health and social  outcomes for people living with mental health  conditions, especially in LMICs (296). Task-sharing  is also cost–effective. One modelling study in  KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa, concluded that  task-sharing with competent non-specialists could  substantially reduce the number of health care  providers needed to close mental health care gaps  at primary level, at minimal additional cost (297). Task-sharing can improve  health and social outcomes for  people living with mental health  conditions, especially in LMICs. Researchers suggest that task-sharing  works best when practitioners: •	 belong to the same community as the people  served and adapt treatment to incorporate local  cultural aspects and beliefs (cultural competency); •	 are supervised and have completed basic training  in relevant skills to deliver the intervention, either  full- or part-time; •	 combine psychological and social components  of care; and •	 have trainers and supervisors who follow a  structured supervision protocol to assure  quality, as well as providing mentoring,  guidance and support (15). 133 Chapter 5 Foundations for change

FIG. 5.4 Tiered care allocates different but complementary tasks to workers at different  levels of the health system Source:  Ryan et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. Diagnose and treat based on  specialized training Accept referrals and manage  complex cases Supervise, train, mentor and  support non-specialists SUPERVISION REFERRALS SPECIALISTS For example, psychiatrists,  psychiatric nurses and social  workers, psychologists, mental  health occupational therapists Identify and manage priority  conditions based on basic  training and standard guidelines Identify and refer complex cases Supervise and support  community workers  GENERAL HEALTH  CARE PROVIDERS For example, general practitioners,  nurses, midwives, case managers   and other primary health care staﬀ Identify, refer and follow up  on cases as appropriate Provide psychosocial  interventions Implement outreach  activities Facilitate social support COMMUNITY  PROVIDERS For example, lay counsellors, community  workers and volunteers, peers, teachers,  social workers and others  Limit exposure to high-risk  situations Manage stress Manage mental health  problems as they arise Seek help when needed INDIVIDUALS All people with or without  mental health conditions 134 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

5.4.1 Expanding the specialist  workforce  A competent specialist workforce forms the  backbone of any mental health system. As  described in Chapter 3 World mental health today,  the lower the income of countries, the fewer  the mental health specialists. In LMICs, mental  health systems – particularly services for children  and adolescents – are grossly understaffed. The  shortage is partly because in LMICs  there are too  few health specialists overall. Other contributing  factors include the stigma associated with  working in mental health and a lack of training  opportunities (298). Professional isolation,  poor remuneration and job dissatisfaction, for  example, all help drive high levels of emigration  among psychiatrists from LMICs (299). The specialist workforce that does exist is  often unequally distributed, with most staff  concentrated in cities and large institutions, and  too few in rural areas. This lack and imbalance  of trained personnel is a huge barrier to care  and puts services out of reach for many people,  especially when a large proportion of specialists  work in private practice, which in many  countries is not covered by health insurance. Most specialists are clinicians at heart, motivated  by providing care to those experiencing mental  health conditions. But if they are to help transform  mental health systems, they must also deploy  diverse competencies. They must work as experts  within multidisciplinary teams; as teachers  strengthening the skills of students and other  staff; as supervisors and mentors to general  health care and community providers who are  task-sharing on mental health; as researchers  contributing to the evidence base on mental  health; as public health specialists developing  service infrastructure; and as advocates  increasing awareness around key issues (300). They must also be able to work with  diverse populations to assure that care is  equitable for racial and ethnic minorities,  LGBTIQ+ persons, migrants and refugees,  and persons experiencing poverty and  homelessness. The risk of not recognizing  mental health conditions or misdiagnosing  them is greater with these populations. Specialist health professionals  have multiple roles and so  require diverse competencies. Many countries do not have training  programmes for psychiatry, clinical psychology  and mental health nursing. Even fewer have  training programmes in child psychiatry  or child mental health. In some cases,  cooperation with universities in high-income  countries can offer a potential solution to  these challenges (see Box 5.10 The Toronto  Addis Ababa Psychiatry Project (TAAPP)). In all cases, it takes time and substantial resources  to train and deploy mental health specialists. But  since they are urgently needed to develop and  support nationwide networks of community-based  care, innovative and flexible training may be  necessary. Some countries have found alternative  routes by introducing new cadres of mental health  professionals who can substitute for psychiatrists, clinical psychologists or psychiatric nurses,  especially in rural areas where the gap in expertise  is often most severe (see Box 5.11 Innovations in  human resources to develop specialist expertise).  These innovations in human resources have  proved critical for the nationwide development  of a functioning mental health system and serve  as potential examples to other countries. 135 Chapter 5 Foundations for change

BOX 5.10 The Toronto Addis Ababa Psychiatry Project (TAAPP) The TAAPP is an educational collaboration between  Addis Ababa University and the University of  Toronto set up to help Ethiopia’s newly established  psychiatry residency programme. It was designed to  supplement the department of psychiatry at Addis  Ababa University with external expertise, helping the  department to teach, provide clinical supervision,  and develop educational capacity. Established in 2003, the TAAPP involves various  faculty and staff from University of Toronto travelling  to Addis Ababa to teach a jointly-set curriculum. At  the same time, selected faculty from Addis Ababa  University are invited to complete year-long clinical  fellowships at a hospital in Toronto. A total of 100 Ethiopian psychiatrists have been  trained with the help of TAAPP, bringing the number  of psychiatrists in Ethiopia up to 113. The TAAPP  programme has recognized that medical faculty  staff need not only clinical competencies but also  educational capabilities. So the programme has  focused on building teaching and training skills  among Ethiopia’s mental health professionals. Since TAAPP began, eight new departments of  psychiatry have opened outside Addis Ababa; and  four new psychiatry residency programmes have  been established across the country. Mental health  services are also now being integrated into all levels  of the national care system. Sources: Wondimagegn et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; University of Toronto, [PHONE_REDACTED]. CASE STUDY Expanding the specialist workforce also relies on  attracting more people to enter mental health as a  profession, retaining them once they are qualified,  and ensuring they are equitably distributed  across a country. Improving recruitment and  retention requires, among other things, action to: •	 tackle stigma and promote positive attitudes  towards mental health as a profession, for  example by marketing it as a challenging and  rewarding area of the health sector; •	 support ongoing education by providing  opportunities for skills development and  knowledge exchange; and •	 enable career progression by, for example,  developing a promotion strategy for staff,  providing opportunities for personal  growth and professional development and  fostering motivation. Improving remuneration, using flexible job  descriptions, and improving social ties among  staff can also help retain mental health staff. In  all cases, salaries and working conditions for  mental health workers should be comparable  to those of other health workers. 136 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

CASE STUDY BOX 5.11 Innovations in human resources to develop specialist expertise Experiences from three low- and  lower-middle-income countries show how  innovations in human resources can expand  specialist expertise, and so support the development  of a functioning mental health system that extends  nationwide, including hard-to-reach rural areas. Bhutan. In 2015, Bhutan introduced a four-year  undergraduate degree clinical counselling course.  As a result of this initiative, more than half of the  30 district and general hospitals now have clinical  counsellors on staff. Their main responsibility is  identifying common conditions – such as depression,  alcohol and substance use disorder, and self-harm –  and managing these through psychoeducation and  psychological counselling. Clinical counsellors work  closely with district doctors and nurses to support  any person who is on psychotropic medications and  refer or follow up as necessary. Liberia. Starting in 2010, in partnership with the  Carter Center’s Mental Health Program, Liberia  has trained 306 primary health workers (registered  nurses, physician assistants and midwives) in  mental health through a six-month training  programme. These include 166 specialists in general  mental health care and 140 specialists in child  and adolescent mental health care. with a focus  on practical application. Graduates are known as  Mental Health Clinicians and are licensed by the  Liberian Board of Nursery and Midwifery to practice  independently. While many do not work full time  on mental health, most work in health care settings  across the country and treat people with mental,  neurological and substance use conditions. Sri Lanka. Over the past 20 years in Sri Lanka,  various training programmes have been launched  for medical professionals, including a one-year  diploma in psychiatry for doctors and a one-year  diploma in basic mental health nursing. The  government also created the position of Medical  Officer of Mental Health (MOMH), which acts as a  district focal point for mental health. Each MOMH  receives three months of pre-service training in  mental health after having completed their first  medical degree. In many districts, the psychiatry  diploma holders and MOMHs work under the  supervision of Colombo-based psychiatrists and  in effect lead and scale up mental health care  in districts. Their role has been instrumental in  ensuring that mental health care is available in all  districts of the country (see Fig. 5.2). Sources: Chencho Dorji, WHO, personal communication, 25 January 2022; Gwaikolo et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Fernando et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 137 Chapter 5 Foundations for change

NARRATIVE 5.4.2 Strengthening general  health care providers’  competencies General health care providers have a major  role in enabling comprehensive mental health  services and scaling up mental health care,  especially where mental health specialists  are rare. In Chile, for example, the National  Depression Detection and Treatment Programme  scaled up mental health services through the  primary  care system (271). Introduced in 2001,  the programme now encompasses more than  500 primary care centres throughout the country,  each of which hosts a general clinical team made  up of primary care doctors, nurses and auxiliary  nurses, with individual therapy and supervision  by a specialist for the most severe cases.  Scaling up mental health care through general  health providers means equipping them with  the skills to detect mental health conditions,  provide basic care, and refer people to specialized  care where necessary (305). For individuals,  receiving mental health care from competent and  compassionate general health care providers can  be very rewarding (read Anders’ experience). In practice, strengthening the skills of primary  care doctors, clinical officers, nurses and other  general health workers means training followed  by ongoing supervision, mentoring and support. Quality training of general health care providers in  mental health care should be part of pre-service  education. Compared with in-service training,  pre-service training is more sustainable because  My GPs were my saviours Anders’ experience Without the direct intervention of my general  practitioners (GP) at critical stages of my life, my  mental health problems could have been more  serious. For 15 years, I have seen mental health  professionals. Every appointment saw me talking to a  different person, repeating my case history time and  time again and receiving at best, a medicine review –  so frustrating and lacking any obvious desire to give  me a good quality of life. My experience with the GP service couldn’t be more  different. Over time, I found two GPs who truly  listened to my needs, who gave me the time I needed  to explain my status and who took extraordinary  steps to make sure my needs were met. Their dedication, kindness and compassion has  helped me time and again over the past few years.  In late 2019, when I was severely ill with depression  and thinking about suicide a lot, it was my GP, not my  psychiatrist, that gave me the kind of help I needed  at the time and my health started to improve. He was  my saviour.  I really don’t know if I would be alive today without  the beautiful support of my GPs. Anders Timms, United Kingdom 138 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

its organization is integrated in teaching curricula  and is typically less costly per trainee. Trainees’  motivation is often relatively high because  pre-service training – unlike most in-service  training – is evaluated through examinations that  must be passed. Yet in many countries any mental  health training provided during medical or professional schooling is brief and mostly theoretical,  while clinical internships are too often limited to  rotations in psychiatric hospitals that do not reflect  clinical practice within general health care (306). Quality training of general  health care providers in mental  health care should be part  of pre-service education. Despite the strategic value of investing in  mental health pre-service training, there is an  urgent need to train the existing general health  workforce, whether face to face, online or through  a combination of both. Such training should  be used to familiarize trainees with clinical  assessment and management of priority mental  health conditions. The training should also  reduce stigma and discrimination in health care.  This can be done by giving people with mental  health conditions co-facilitation roles during  training (210). In all cases, training should include  supervised practice in general health care settings. It is important to build confidence of general  health care providers in psychosocial approaches,  which are a necessary part of holistic mental  health care, but which are often not prominent  in primary health care. Many general health care  providers feel more familiar and comfortable with  a purely biomedical approach in which a diagnosis  is followed with medication or another biomedical  intervention (for example surgery or dialysis). But  psychotropic medication is not the first line of  treatment for many mental health conditions.  Moreover, even when psychotropic medicines  are indicated, general health care providers need  to understand how to provide or arrange for  psychosocial support alongside medications. Although most primary health care providers  may have too limited time to personally deliver  multi-session psychological treatments for  depression or anxiety, they should appreciate  the relative value of such care and link, where  available, to relevant providers, whether specialist  or community providers skilled in psychological  counselling. In addition, all primary health care  providers can make time to encourage and  guide people to use evidence-based self-help  books or digital self-help interventions as part of  depression and anxiety management (see section  7.1.4 Scaling up care for people with common  conditions: self-help and In focus: Harnessing  digital technologies for mental health). To help countries implement training, supervision  and support for general health care workers,  WHO’s mhGAP has developed a set of task-sharing  training packages and implementation tools (307).  These are designed to teach 12 core competencies  relevant to assessing, managing and following up  people with depression, psychoses, epilepsy, child  and adolescent mental and behavioural disorders,  dementia, disorders due to substance use, and  self-harming or suicidal thoughts or behaviours  (see Fig. 5.5). All mhGAP training is designed to be  followed up with ongoing supervision and support. Since it was introduced in 2010, mhGAP training  and supervision has been carried out in more than  100 countries, helping to improve competencies  in, and access to, mental health care all over the  world (308). This is important as a global review  of short mental health training that is based on  WHO guidelines found that such training improves  knowledge attitudes, skills and confidence among  a wide range of general health care providers,  including community health care workers, trained  doctors, nurses, counsellors, paramedics and  other non-medical staff (309). These changes lead  to improved clinical practice with better outcomes. 139 Chapter 5 Foundations for change

FIG. 5.5 Core competencies targeted by the mhGAP training of health care providers Source:  WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]. Note: MNS = mental health, neurological and substance use.  5.4.3 Equipping community  providers with mental health  care competencies Comprehensive mental health care extends  beyond health professionals to include other  care providers based in the community. These  potentially include people with lived experience,  lay volunteers, community workers, coordinators  of user groups, religious counsellors, teachers,  hairdressers, lawyers, police officials, prison  guards and family and friends among others. OBSERVATION BY  SUPERVISOR MULTIPLE CHOICE  QUESTIONS Knows common presentations  of priority conditions Knows assessment principles  of MNS conditions  Knows management principles  of MNS conditions  Uses eﬀective  communication skills with people with MNS conditions Performs assessment for priority conditions Assesses and manages physical  conditions of people  with MNS conditions Assesses and manages emergency  presentations of priority conditions Provides psychosocial  interventions to  individuals and their carers Delivers pharmacological  interventions as needed  and appropriate  Plans and performs  follow-up for priority  conditions Refers to specialists  and links with  agencies, as  appropriate and  available  ROLE PLAY SUPERVISION ASSESSMENT ATTITUDE KNOWLEDGE SKILLS Promotes respect and dignity  for people with MNS conditions 140 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

These providers, who are not mental health  specialists, are often acceptable to users because  they tend to have a more direct knowledge of local  attitudes, customs and languages. This makes  them well placed to identify and provide timely,  culturally-appropriate first-line care. They can also  help access support across social, education and  justice spheres. And they can provide a source of  practical and emotional help with the activities  of daily living in the community. Community  providers also have a role in delivering preventive  and promotive services and in providing crisis  support to individuals and families in distress. People with lived experience  can be important first line  providers of support. Given the diversity in potential tasks fulfilled by  community providers, training for this group can  vary significantly (310). Emergency field workers  need to be oriented in the principles of psychological first aid (311). Caregivers need to be equipped  with skills to support children with mental health  conditions or behavioural problems. Community  health workers need to be at the very least  trained in identifying people with mental health  conditions and referring them, where necessary, to  the relevant level of care (see section 7.1.4 Scaling  up care for people with common conditions:  non-specialist counselling). All providers of mental  health services, including community providers,  need an understanding of human rights (184). Many community providers – including  emergency workers and family caregivers  – may face significant stress themselves.  Training for these groups should also focus on  strengthening competencies in self-care (see  section 5.4.4 Competencies for self-care). People with lived experience will also need to be  prepared to support others (312). Peer experts  are living proof that recovery is possible; and  they have a vital role in supporting other people  with mental health conditions in their recovery  journey (read Benjamin’s experience). Peer experts  in mental health also have a role within support  groups for other health conditions, such as HIV,  NTDs or Zika. In these cases, acknowledging  and building skills in how to address emotional  elements of the group members’ needs is a good  way of integrating mental health support. Peer expertise, informed by the experience of  mental ill-health, can be regarded as a third  domain of expertise in mental health care, in  addition to scientific evidence and practical  knowledge and skills (313). Becoming a peer  expert comprises a three-step process (313).  It begins with the lived experience of suffering  and recovering from a mental health condition.  Reflection on this experience – including analysis  and learning about the experience of others –  turns lived experience into peer knowledge, or  knowledge by experience. The third step is training  in skills and attitudes to become a designated peer  expert. From then on, as for all care providers,  an ongoing learning process through practice is  required to deepen peer experts’ competencies. All types of care providers, including community  providers, can play a key role in scaling up care  for depression and anxiety through psychological interventions; but their competencies should  be ensured (see Box 5.12 EQUIP: Assessing and  building competencies for psychological interventions). Experience shows that integrating  community providers in teams with mental  health professionals using a task-sharing  approach can also help support people with  severe conditions such as schizophrenia (see  section 7.3.3 Psychosocial rehabilitation). 141 Chapter 5 Foundations for change

We can all contribute meaningfully  to the world Benjamin’s experience  I became depressed as a child at the age of 14  growing up in the rural north of Liberia. The first  line of treatment was traditional medicine and I was  taken to a traditional healer in Guinea who reduced  my anxiety by giving me traditional medicine. This  helped to stabilize me to continue my secondary  education and become a high school graduate. A few years later, I relapsed. Again I was treated by  faith-based healers but this time, it did not help. For  many years both me and my parents struggled with  my mental health. Eventually, my older brother took  me to a mental health treatment facility. I started receiving medication and it has helped me a  lot. It enabled me to complete my university studies  and now I work as a school teacher. I have a wife, we  are blessed with three boys and I am living happily  and doing great. I am the national Secretary for the Cultivation for  Users’ Hope (CFUH), which is the only organization  established and run by health service users in Liberia.  We work in the interest of people living with mental  health conditions through advocacy, capacity  building, empowerment and stigma reduction. If people with psychosocial disabilities receive the  attention and services they need and are treated with  respect, they too can contribute meaningfully to the  world and societies at large. Benjamin Ballah, Liberia NARRATIVE 142 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

TOOL BOX 5.12 EQUIP: Assessing and building competencies for psychological interventions Research has repeatedly shown that people who  are not mental health specialists can effectively  provide brief psychological interventions, based on  established psychotherapies, such as CBT and IPT, as  long as they are trained and supervised. But how can governments or any other stakeholder  know whether these care providers deliver competent  care, given that they are not licensed by professional  organizations? Ensuring Quality in Psychological  Support (EQUIP) is a WHO initiative to assess and build  competencies for a range of interventions. EQUIP develops and disseminates competency-based  training materials and guidance and competency  assessment tools. As such, EQUIP offers a mechanism  to ensure and improve quality. EQUIP resources  have been field tested in Ethiopia, Jordan, Kenya,  Lebanon, Nepal, Peru, Uganda and Zambia and  are available through an on-line platform (https:// whoequip.org/en-gb). The EQUIP platform has been  used for competency-driven training in psychological  interventions for non-specialists, in mhGAP training  for primary care workers, and in basic skills training  for teachers, nurses, and community health workers. It has been proven that use of EQUIP reduces harmful  behaviour and increases competencies of trainees  compared to conventional training methods. Sources: Singla et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Kohrt et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Kohrt et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 5.4.4 Competencies for  self-care Boosting competencies to enable a transformation in mental health care is not  simply about expanding the workforce for  delivering services; it is also about strengthening individuals’ skills in self-care. In WHO’s optimal mix of mental health services,  self-care provides a base for mental health care  that, when combined with community-based  mental health care, will meet the mental  health needs of a population (317). Self-care is important to people. A recent  survey across 113 countries found that  among people with self-reported anxiety or  depression, the most-endorsed methods for  feeling better were improving healthy lifestyle  behaviours, spending time in nature or outdoors  and talking to friends or family (150). For self-care, all people should, as far as possible,  know how to (318): •	 limit exposure to ‘high risk’ situations that may  adversely impact mental health; •	 manage stress; •	 discuss and manage mental health problems as  they arise; and •	 seek help when it’s needed. For people living with mental health conditions,  self-care also requires skills and confidence to  manage one’s own mental health conditions  143 Chapter 5 Foundations for change

NARRATIVE I play an active role in my recovery Tamira’s experience My experience with our health care system  highlighted the importance of a holistic approach to  well-being that incorporates physical, mental and  emotional health: and how difficult it is to be well in  the absence of health in any of these categories. My drive for holistic well-being was fuelled in part  by the words ‘apprehension’ and ‘detention’ on  my Form 1 (the form that a physician submits to  authorize involuntary admission to a psychiatric  facility for up to 72 hours). This language made me  feel incredibly inferior and showed me how little  our mental health care system attempts to disguise  the atrocities of what passes for ‘care’. It set me on a  search for recovery outside the formal system. My search for answers to support my mental health  included researching eastern, naturopathic and  functional medicine. I also looked to exercise,  religion, spirituality, meditation and mindfulness and  forms of positive psychology. I found being outdoors  and in nature was a great support tool.  I also looked inside myself, reflecting on my life, my  values and my purpose. And I explored communities,  online via blogs and social media, which I then used  as a tool to find my voice and share my experiences. I’m not prepared to say I have ‘recovered’. And I  recognize that some avenues of my search have been  more fruitful than others. But what I’ve learned is  that for myself and my mental health nothing is more  valuable than the belief that I have the power within  me to change myself. Consent is still not considered  necessary in our mental health care system; but now  I have the power not to give the system consent to  make me feel inferior. Tamira Loewen, Canada outside of formal services (read Tamira’s  experience). That might be achieved by oneself,  or with the help of family and friends (see section  7.1.1 Putting people first: recovery-oriented care). The development of self-care skills can start  early. For example, from early childhood we  learn from our parents how to deal with difficult  emotions. Within schools, life skills training can  teach emotional and social competencies such  as emotional regulation, problem-solving, interpersonal skills and stress management (see  section 6.3.2 Protecting and promoting child and  adolescent health: school-based programmes). For adults, self-care competencies are usually  supported through self-help materials and  interventions that draw on evidence-based  psychological treatment principles (see section  7.1.4 Scaling up care for people with common  conditions: self-help). Such materials can be  provided in multiple formats, including one-to-one  and group self-help interventions, facilitated or  not. They can also be delivered through multiple  media, including self-help books, audio-visual  materials, and online or app-based interventions  (see Box 5.13 Living with the times: a toolkit for  older adults). In all cases, resources designed 144 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

CASE STUDY BOX 5.13 Living with the times: a toolkit for older adults Living with the Times is a psychosocial support toolkit  designed to address the information and coping  needs of older adults during the COVID-19 pandemic.  As a high-risk group for severe disease and death  from COVID-19, older adults have had to be especially  cautious to avoid contracting it. Many have faced  long periods of isolation and uncertainty. The toolkit comprises a series of posters that  address common concerns of older adults during the  pandemic, such as how to stay healthy, how to lift  one’s mood, how to stay connected, how to seek help  and how to cope with grief and loss. Each poster combines illustrations and short  texts for print or online use. Key messages require  minimal reading skills, are culturally diverse and  aim to engage older adults in conversations and  activities. An accompanying manual shows carers  how to use the posters in guided conversations to  facilitate engagement. The posters were tested with older adults from  different countries and backgrounds. They have  been widely translated and adapted in accessible  formats for people with special needs. They have, for  example, been used in Greece, Nigeria, Republic of  Korea and Syria, where they have had a high degree  of user acceptance. Source: IASC, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 145 Chapter 5 Foundations for change

to build self-care skills should be available in  languages and literacy levels that enable as  many people to understand them as possible.  The use of self-help materials can be integrated  in clinical care (see section 7.1.4 Scaling up care  for people with common conditions: self-help).  For example, facilitators can guide people to  use self-help materials. This is called guided  self-help, and it has been repeatedly shown to be  as effective as conventional face-to-face specialist  interventions for depression and anxiety (320).  Guided self-help tools can be used to support  people through the process of setting up a recovery  plan for themselves (321). They can also be rapidly  deployed at scale, making them particularly  promising for mental health transformation. Recovery colleges Recovery colleges involve supporting people  living with mental health conditions through  adult education rather than treatment. Their  curricula may vary, from understanding different  mental health issues and treatment options to  exploring what recovery means and how family  and friends can help support it (see section 7.1.1  Putting people first: recovery-oriented care). They  often include courses focused on strengthening  competencies for self-care and developing life  skills and confidence to either rebuild life outside  services or get the most out of services. Guided self-help for depression  and anxiety has been found  to have comparable effects to  face-to-face treatments. A key feature of recovery colleges is that people  with lived experience co-produce all aspects  of the college, from curriculum development  to course delivery and quality assessment.  Studies show that recovery colleges can play an  important role in decreasing the use of mental  health services, suggesting that students develop  improved agency and ability to manage their  own mental health (322). These colleges can  also benefit staff with key outcomes including  experiencing and valuing co-production,  changed perceptions of service users and  increased passion and job motivation (323).  At the societal level, recovery colleges provide  opportunities to engage more people in learning  alongside people with mental health conditions  and tackle stigma through social contact. 146 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

6 PROMOTION PREVENTION  PRIORITIES FOR ACTION  Promotion  and prevention  for change

Chapter summary In this chapter we consider the multisectoral promotion and prevention  strategies required at all stages of life to transform mental health. We  explore some of the intervention options available to reduce risk and  build resilience at individual, social and structural levels, summarizing  the rationale and evidence behind these and showcasing examples of  good practice from around the world. And we examine three priorities for  action: suicide prevention; protecting and promoting child and adolescent  mental health; and promoting and protecting mental health at work. Key messages from this chapter are: Promotion and prevention in mental health  work by identifying underlying factors that  influence mental health and intervening  on them to reduce risks and/or increase  resilience and mental well-being. Effective strategies require multisectoral action and may involve making  changes at the individual, social (family  and community) or structural level. The health sector can contribute by  embedding promotion and prevention  programmes in health services and  supporting initiatives in non-health  settings, among other actions. Suicide prevention is a global priority,  and much progress can be achieved  using the strategies set out in WHO’s  LIVE LIFE initiative, including limiting  access to means, responsible media  reporting, social and emotional learning  for adolescents and early intervention. Promoting child and adolescent mental  health can be achieved through policies  and legislation, caregiver support,  school-based programmes and changes  to community and online environments. Employers and governments have a  responsibility to promote and protect all  people’s mental health at work and can  do this through legislation and regulation,  organizational strategies, manager  training and interventions for workers. 148 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

Chapter 5 Foundations for change described  the foundations for change towards improved  mental health, highlighting the importance of  enabling frameworks, public and political support,  technical skills and sufficient resources. Chapters  6 and 7 will consider what that transformation  looks like on the ground, in terms of the specific  strategies and services that can be deployed  to improve the mental health of populations.  This includes strengthening multisectoral  promotion and prevention strategies at all  stages of life (the focus of this chapter) while  simultaneously building up mental health and  social care in the community (see Chapter 7  Restructuring and scaling up care for impact). Effective promotion and prevention is important  to enhance mental well-being and resilience,  prevent the onset and burden of mental health  conditions and drive down the need for mental  health care. There is increasing evidence  that it is often also cost–effective (324). In essence, promotion and prevention in mental  health work by identifying underlying factors that  influence mental health and intervening on them  (see section 2.2 Determinants of mental health).  This includes efforts to tackle “distal” structural  factors that shape the conditions of daily life, such  as poverty inequality and environment quality.  But it often also focuses on more “proximal”  individual and family factors, such as individual  coping skills or parenting behaviours, that have  a more direct influence on mental health. Together, promotion and prevention comprise  a wide range of activities that can be targeted at  individuals, specific groups or whole populations  (see Table 6.1). Recalling that mental health is  more than the absence of a disease or infirmity  (see Chapter 2 Principles and drivers in public  mental health), mental health promotion is  about maintaining or enhancing people’s mental  well-being, while prevention as described in  this chapter (i.e. primary prevention) is about  stopping the onset of mental health conditions. TABLE 6.1 Target populations and overall objectives of promotion and primary  prevention in mental health  TYPE TARGET POPULATION OBJECTIVE Mental health  promotion Variable  Maintain or enhance mental  wellbeing, or increase resilience Primary prevention Universal  Whole population Reduce incidence (i.e. prevent the  onset of mental health conditions)  Selective Subpopulations (e.g. specific demographic  groups) at an elevated risk of developing a  mental health condition Indicated  Individuals who have signs or symptoms of  a mental health condition but do not meet  diagnostic criteria for mental disorder 149 Chapter 6 Promotion and prevention for change

In practice, it can be hard to make the distinction  between prevention and promotion. Strategies  that reshape the determinants of mental  health to boost mental well-being can also  work to stop mental health conditions from  developing in individuals; so mental health  promotion and universal prevention are  often implemented as one and the same. This chapter considers what it takes for countries  to effectively pursue promotion and primary  prevention in practice. There is no simple solution:  a single intervention is rarely sufficient to effect  change across all age ranges and at-risk groups.  Rather, as highlighted by the Comprehensive  mental health action plan 2013–2030, countries  need to implement a wide range of universal,  selective and indicated interventions. In the sections that follow, we explore some of  the intervention options available, summarizing  the rationale and evidence behind these and  showcasing examples of best practice from  around the world. We highlight three priorities  for action where the evidence and experience of  mental health benefits are particularly compelling:  interventions to prevent suicide; interventions  to promote and protect the mental health of  children and youth; and interventions to promote  and protect mental health in the workplace. FIG. 6.1 Mental health promotion and universal prevention focus on factors that  support mental health  Source:  Friedli, [PHONE_REDACTED]. Physical, emotional and  cognitive skills and  behaviours that buﬀer  stress and contribute to  individual resilience,  capability and control. Broad factors and  features of daily living  and working conditions  that enhance community  capacity for wellbeing. WIDESPREAD SUPPORTIVE  ENVIRONMENT FOR MENTAL HEALTH INDIVIDUAL CAPITAL STRUCTURAL CHANGES Norms, networks and institutions  that enhance family relations, create  opportunities to work and learn and  build community trust, cohesion and  cooperation for mutual benefit. SOCIAL CAPITAL 150 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

6.1 Mental health promotion and  universal prevention Mental health promotion and universal  prevention strategies are generally designed  to shift the risk profile of whole populations  and boost overall well-being. They do this by  reshaping the determinants of mental health  across individual, social and structural spheres  of influence to establish supportive environments for mental health (see Fig. 6.1). Universal strategies and interventions are highly  diverse. Many interventions are delivered at the  community level, for example by local leaders  or health care providers. Others are delivered  at higher levels, for example through national  labour laws or poverty reduction strategies. In practice, universal interventions often  combine different strategies at individual,  social and structural levels. So, for example,  interventions may combine life skills training  (individual capital) with local events for older  adults (social capital) and mass anti-stigma  campaigns (structural changes) (see Box 6.1  The A-B-C campaign for good mental health). BOX 6.1 The A-B-C campaign for good mental health The Act-Belong-Commit (A-B-C) campaign in Australia  is designed to encourage people to be proactive in  becoming more mentally healthy. It is built around  three simple messages: •	 Do something to keep physically, socially,  spiritually and cognitively active (Act). •	 Do something with someone to keep connected to  friends, family and community (Belong). •	 Do something meaningful, important and valuable  to provide a sense of purpose (Commit). These are supported by online resources (including  self-help guides, fact sheets, lists of local activities,  and school curricula) and community-based  programmes aimed at strengthening connections  between community members and helping people  participate in diverse activities that can protect and  promote their mental health. The campaign has more than 160 community and  organizational partners and collaborators in Western  Australia and has also been adapted and adopted  in other parts of the country as well as overseas,  in Denmark, Faroe Islands, Norway and the United  States of America. By 2018, 82% of Western Australians were aware  of the A-B-C campaigns, 16% of whom had taken  action to improve their mental health as a result.  The campaign’s school-based programme for  mental health promotion had also trained teachers  in 51 local schools, reaching [PHONE_REDACTED]children and  adolescents (6–18 years of age). Sources: Curtin University, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Anwar-McHenry et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. CASE STUDY 151 Chapter 6 Promotion and prevention for change

6.1.1 Building individual  capital for mental health Strategies to build individual resources often  focus on strengthening emotional and cognitive  skills, knowledge, capabilities and attitudes.  They do this through, for example, parenting  or learning programmes that promote: •	 Competence to live, learn and work  effectively. This includes essential life skills  for communication, critical thinking, decision  making, problem solving, self-awareness,  empathy and care for others. It also includes the  ability to self-care and choose behaviours and  lifestyles that keep us healthy. •	 Resilience to manage and adapt effectively  to life stressors. Importantly, having resilience  does not mean never experiencing difficulty or  distress. Rather, having resilience means having  the capacity to deal with stress and adversity  and can “bounce back”. •	 Empowerment to have confidence, choice and  control in one’s own life. This includes having a  sense of respect, hope, identity and purpose as  well as having feelings of mastery, agency, hope  and justice. For people experiencing a mental  health condition, empowerment also includes  being able to actively engage in all aspects  of one’s mental health care (see Chapter 5, In  focus: Engaging and empowering people with  lived experience). BOX 6.2 Using sports to promote life skills in Hong Kong youth In China, Hong Kong SAR, a sports-based youth  development programme has been found to promote  life skills and empowerment among adolescents. The programme provided weekly after-school sports  mentoring sessions to a group of adolescents using  a positive youth development approach that plays  to the adolescents’ strengths rather than correcting  problematic behaviours. Each week, participants in the programme learned  to set goals, build skills and reflect on their feelings  about a specific sport. There were no teachers or  predesigned curricula. Rather, the mentors worked  like facilitators, allowing the students to set their own  learning goals and paths through communication.  Mentors also provided tools and techniques for  problem solving within the sport’s context and  opportunities for putting these into practice within  an environment that fostered resilience building. A rigorous evaluation concluded that in addition  to improving physical activity and fitness, the  programme improved students’ mental well-being,  self-efficacy, and resilience. Source: Ho et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. CASE STUDY 152 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

Mental health promoting interventions to build  individual capital often target young people,  for example through school-based social and  emotional skills programmes or through youth  development programmes. Community youth  centres, after-school clubs and community  mentoring initiatives can all work to strengthen  competence, resilience and empowerment and  promote mental health (see Box 6.2 Using sports  to promote life skills in Hong Kong youth). Promoting healthy behaviours Building individual competence also includes  interventions designed to support people to  change behaviours that undermine both physical  and mental health. Low levels of physical activity,  tobacco smoking, hazardous alcohol use, drug use,  poor sleep and unhealthy dietary patterns are all  associated with increased risks of both physical  and mental health conditions (329, 100, 330). Early childhood development programmes  and schools are key platforms to not only  build social and emotional skills (see section  6.3.2 Protecting and promoting child and  adolescent mental health) but also to provide  knowledge about physically and mentally healthy  behaviours in children and adolescents. Educating young people about  the harms of using high potency  cannabis should be considered  to reduce the incidence of  psychosis in communities. Raising health literacy about alcohol, tobacco,  physical exercise and nutrition are already  accepted public health strategies (331). In  addition, major campaigns to educate young  people about the harms of using high potency  cannabis should be considered to reduce the  incidence of psychosis in communities (332). 6.1.2 Building social resources  for mental health Building social resources for mental health  involves creating opportunities to foster  positive relationships and social support at  different levels: within families, among peers  and across the community throughout life  (see Table 6.[PHONE_REDACTED]. This includes ensuring  that social institutions – including preschool,  school, and the labour market – recognize  their role in supporting mental well-being  and work to strengthen social resources. During infancy and childhood, family relations  are especially important: some of the most  important sources of resilience for children  living in low-income homes include parental  beliefs and behaviours that promote self-esteem,  social support (including from other adults),  and a quality home learning environment (325).  Through adolescence and adulthood social  support and good interpersonal relations – at  home, school, work and in the wider community  – remain hugely impactful. For older adults,  social connectedness is particularly important to  reduce risk factors such as loneliness and social  isolation. At this stage of life, meaningful social  activities can significantly improve positive mental  health, life satisfaction and quality of life; they  can also reduce depressive symptoms (334). 153 Chapter 6 Promotion and prevention for change

TABLE 6.2 Examples of strategies and approaches that focus on strengthening social  resources to promote and protect mental health  PROMOTION STRATEGY EXAMPLES Support caregiver mental  health  •	 Identify, support and refer parents and other caregivers with mental  health conditions •	 Peer support groups for new parents Enable good parenting •	 Caregiver skills training for caregivers of children and adolescents •	 Peer support groups for new parents •	 Early childhood home visits Create protective learning  environments •	 Improve school culture and safety •	 Preschool education and enrichment programmes •	 Anti-bullying programmes •	 Anti-racism and anti-sexism programmes •	 Peer support groups and mentoring programmes within schools •	 Health literacy in mental health for teachers Create protective working  environments  •	 Policies to mitigate psychosocial risk factors (for example on working  hours and harassment) •	 Mental health awareness raising and training to enable workers to  provide initial support to colleagues in distress •	 Reasonable work accommodations for people with mental health  conditions  Enable healthy personal  relationships  •	 Healthy relationship programmes for youth and couples •	 Anti-discrimination and anti-violence empowerment and education  programmes Strengthen social support  for older adults •	 Befriending initiatives •	 Community clubs and social activities for the aged Create safe  and supportive  neighbourhoods •	 Physical changes to improve social interaction •	 Community policing At all ages and across settings, protecting against  discrimination, violence and abuse is paramount  to protecting mental health. In most countries  there is a huge need for greater gender equity  and women’s empowerment. And in all countries,  protecting women, children and older adults from  violence is of particular concern. Intimate partner  violence and sexual violence against women are  154 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

NARRATIVE My depression stemmed from  childhood experiences Ntokozo’s experience My father passed away when I was very young, leaving  me with my mother who later abandoned me at a  neighbour’s house. I didn’t hear from her again. I was  taken in by an uncle, and I faced a lot of physical abuse  and bullying. Around the age of 12, I began to experience symptoms  of anxiety and depression. I remember asking my  uncle if having thoughts of killing oneself was normal.  His response still sticks with me: “You’re too young  to have suicidal thoughts; you don’t know what real  problems are.” A few weeks after this conversation I attempted  suicide. Luckily a close family member was nearby  and rushed me to the clinic. I was then taken to a  traditional healer by my grandfather who, due to his  cultural beliefs around mental health, believed I was  possessed by an evil spirit. My attempted suicide was  never spoken about. Instead, it was kept a secret and  my mental health condition remained undiagnosed  and untreated. My struggles with mental health continued throughout  my adult life. When my symptoms became too difficult  to ignore I sought professional help. It was only then,  years after my first symptoms, that I was diagnosed  with major depression and anxiety disorder, which were  considered to be due to my childhood experiences. Ntokozo Nyathi, Zimbabwe potent risks for depression and anxiety, eating  disorders, suicide attempts and post-traumatic  stress disorder (read Lion’s experience in  Chapter [PHONE_REDACTED], 45). And young people who  grow up in families or communities where there  is violence are at risk of a range of behavioural  and emotional disturbances that undermine  mental health (read Ntokozo’s experience).  There is substantial evidence on what works to  prevent violence against women and children,  which includes: interventions for strengthening  relationship, parenting and life skills; empowering  women; strengthening neighbourhood and  school safety; and transforming patriarchal  social norms and practices (336, 337). In all cases, context is important: programmes  that build social capital, responsibility  and action to prevent discrimination and  violence and other mental health-risking  behaviour are particularly successful if they  are driven by local risk profiles and resources  (see Box 6.3 Communities That Care). 155 Chapter 6 Promotion and prevention for change

CASE STUDY BOX 6.3 Communities That Care Communities That Care (CTC) is a community-level  prevention system for decreasing risk, enhancing  protection and reducing mental health-risking  behaviour in youth. Tried and tested in more than 500  high-income country communities over 20 years, it  has been found to effectively prevent delinquency,  violence and substance use in adolescents. The Communities That Care system trains and  supports community coalitions to use data-driven,  science-based prevention practices to target locally  prioritized risk and protective factors. It starts with  establishing a group of community stakeholders  and training them in the principles of prevention  science and the relationship between youth risks  and behavioural disorders. A youth survey provides  local epidemiological data on risk, protection and  youth behaviours, which are used to develop a  community risk profile and identify priorities for  action. Based on this, the community group develops  an action plan, selecting prevention interventions  from a compendium of evidence-based options (for  example, programmes focused on parenting skills,  school curricula or after-school activities). Communities That Care interventions can operate  at multiple levels, across multiple settings, and may  include social media campaigns, parenting support  and skills-building initiatives, changes to school  curricula, management or teaching practices, and  mentoring and after-school programmes. Communities That Care’s success in preventing  health-risking behaviour in adolescents has been  found to endure over the long term, with adolescents  exposed to the system continuing to abstain from  gateway drug use, antisocial behaviour and violence  through to the age of 21 years. Sources: Hawkins et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Oesterle et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 6.1.3 Making structural  changes for mental health Making structural changes for mental health  involves reshaping the underlying conditions  of daily life to enhance individual, family and  community capacities for well-being. It is  about strengthening rules and regulations,  changing norms and values, and introducing  adequate support mechanisms to tackle  disadvantage, uphold human rights and  ensure fair and equal access to infrastructure,  services and opportunities for all. A range of macro-level policies and strategic  actions that enable or expedite these structural  changes can be pursued; their stated aims go far  beyond mental health promotion and protection,  but they each have an important effect on mental  health (340). Policies and strategic actions include: •	 Measures to reduce financial insecurity,  poverty and income inequality. Examples of  these measures are social protection, pension  systems, debt relief, economic empowerment  and other poverty alleviation programmes  as well as livelihood support for people with  physical and psychosocial disabilities. There  156 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

is an increasing body of evidence from LMICs  showing that cash transfer programmes not  only alleviate financial hardship but also benefit  recipients’ mental health and well-being (341). •	 Measures to enable access to labour  markets. Despite psychosocial risks such as  harassment in the workplace (see section 6.3.3  Promoting and protecting mental health at  work), employment has a positive influence  on mental health, while unemployment is a  notable risk (342). Active labour market policies  and programmes – such as vocational training  courses, job search assistance, wage subsidies or  supported internships and work experiences –  can support those looking for work, in particular  the long-term unemployed, as well as those with  psychosocial or other disabilities (343). •	 Measures to enhance access to education.  Education is vitally important for physical and  mental health as well as economic growth and  poverty reduction. Initiatives to close the gender  gap in education, mitigate early school leaving,  increase school enrolment and boost adult literacy  can all serve to enhance access to education. •	 Measures to improve safe and secure housing.  Overcrowded, insecure and inadequate  housing as well as homelessness all pose risks  to mental health. These risks can be mitigated  through supported housing programmes and by  improving access to safe, affordable and good  quality housing for disadvantaged groups (see  also section 7.3.4 Supported living services) (344). •	 Measures to protect against discrimination.  These include laws and regulations that  promote inclusion and prevent discrimination  based on ethnicity, sexual orientation, religion  or age; and that cover the rights of women,  children, older adults and people with physical  and psychosocial disabilities (see section 4.2.1  Action against stigma and discrimination). As detailed by the Lancet Commission on Global  Mental Health and Sustainable Development,  the SDGs provide a potential framework for  making structural changes because many of the  goals explicitly address key social and structural  determinants of mental health (see section 4.3  Enabling social and economic development) (15). Although the health sector has a clear role  in prevention and promotion (see In focus:  Enabling multisectoral collaboration: what role  for the health sector?) most universal strategies  require action beyond the health sector. This  is important because any model of health  promotion and universal prevention that fails  to tackle the structural determinants of mental  health will be limited in its reach. Moreover, the  broad social and structural ills – such as abuse,  exploitation and discrimination – that pervade  society must be redressed not simply because  they impact health but because they violate  our common values in and of themselves. 6.2 Selective and indicated prevention Unlike universal prevention, which aims to  shift the risk profile of whole populations,  selective and indicated prevention strategies are  designed to reduce risk in one or more groups  of individuals who are at higher-than-average  risk of experiencing mental health conditions. This includes priority groups as a whole, who  are at higher risk of experiencing mental health  conditions because of the demographics,  local contexts and circumstances in which  they find themselves (selective prevention).  But it also includes individuals who are at  157 Chapter 6 Promotion and prevention for change

higher risk because they are already experiencing symptoms of what may be an emerging  mental disorder (indicated prevention). At-risk people may (but do not necessarily)  include people living in poverty or with chronic  health conditions, people with disabilities, youth  exposed to violence or neglect, minority groups,  indigenous peoples, refugees, older adults,  LGBTIQ+ people, ex-combatants, prisoners and  people exposed to humanitarian emergencies.  There is large diversity of risks, problems and  resources within and across each of these groups. 6.2.1 Supporting at-risk  people through selective  prevention The Comprehensive mental health action  plan 2013–2030 is clear that national mental  health strategies should include promotion  and prevention interventions that specifically  respond to locally-identified at-risk people’s  needs across the lifespan. Priority groups for  selective prevention may vary depending  on the national or local risk profile. Selective prevention is often helpful to specific  age groups across the life-course. For example,  young children and adolescents may benefit from  interventions as they go through developmentally  sensitive periods (see section 6.3.2 Protecting and  promoting child and adolescent mental health). Interventions to expand social  contacts and activities are  crucial to protecting the mental  well-being of older adults. Older adults can also be supported through  selective prevention. Research suggests that interventions to expand social contacts and increase  participation in social activities are crucial to  protecting older adults’ mental well-being (345). Another priority group for selective prevention  is people experiencing humanitarian  emergencies. The forthcoming Mental Health  and Psychosocial Support Minimum Service  Package (MHPSS MSP) (see Box 6.4 The Mental  Health and Psychosocial Support Minimum  Service Package (MHPSS MSP)) describes  preventive and promotive strategies to broadly  support people in these settings, including: •	 disseminating information to raise mental  health literacy and awareness; •	 providing early childhood development and  group activities for child well-being; •	 supporting pre-existing community initiatives  that promote mental health, including  re-establishing normal cultural and religious  activities, women’s groups, youth networks and  other interest groups; •	 facilitating new community self-help  initiatives; and •	 supporting caregivers , teachers and other  education personnel to promote children’s  mental health. 6.2.2 Preventing mental  health conditions through  indicated interventions Indicated interventions are designed for  people who present with signs and symptoms,  but who do not meet the criteria for a  formal diagnosis of mental disorder. For people with elevated levels of depressive  symptoms, indicated interventions include  psychotherapies such as CBT and IPT, both of  which have been found to delay or prevent  the onset of depression (347). CBT is also an  effective indicated intervention for people  with anxiety symptoms (348). Given that  “subthreshold” depression and anxiety are  extremely common, it is particularly important  that indicated interventions for this group of  158 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

BOX 6.4 The Mental Health and Psychosocial Support Minimum Service Package  (MHPSS MSP)  The inter-agency MHPSS MSP is a costed package  that outlines the minimum MHPSS activities  that should be implemented in emergency  settings (e.g. due to war or natural disaster)  across health, protection, education and other  sectors. It aims to ensure humanitarian responses:  are better informed by global guidelines; are  evidence-based, predictable, equitable; and  make more effective use of limited resources.  This should lead to improved quality, scale  and coordination of MHPSS programming, and  substantially better mental health and well-being  among affected populations. The MHPSS MSP includes preventive, promotive and  treatment interventions and covers: •	 inter-agency coordination and assessments; •	 essential components of MHPSS programmes,  including programme design, monitoring and  evaluation, staff care and staff competencies; •	 MHPSS programme activities, such as orienting  humanitarian workers and community members;  strengthening self-help and community support;  and providing extra support to people impaired by  distress or mental health conditions; and •	 activities and considerations for specific  settings, such as infectious disease outbreaks Source: WHO, UNICEF, UNHCR and UNFPA (346). TOOL people are inexpensive and scalable. Self-help  materials, whether through books or digital  programmes, can be particularly useful (see  section 5.4.4 Competencies for self-care). And  early interventions by trained lay counsellors  is another inexpensive and scalable approach  to preventing the onset of mental disorders. For people with signs and symptoms that  indicate a high risk for psychosis, specialized  early intervention can substantially improve  clinical outcomes (see Box 7.14 Services for  people with first-episode psychosis) (349). Indicated prevention effectively offers support  to those with the most to gain. It may also  deliver significant returns on investment. The  economic evidence for early intervention in  psychosis indicates that it is cost–effective,  and can even save money (350, 351). Indicated interventions for people with heightened  psychological distress during or after an  emergency can be particularly useful. This includes  facilitator-guided group-based interventions such  as WHO Self-Help Plus, which has been used, with  varying degrees of success, to prevent onset of  mental disorders in refugees and asylum seekers  in Türkiye, Uganda, and Western Europe (352, 353). 159 Chapter 6 Promotion and prevention for change

IN FOCUS Enabling multisectoral  promotion and prevention:  what role for the health sector? Reshaping the individual, social and structural factors that influence mental health  often requires power, experience and expertise that lie beyond the health sector.  Housing improvement schemes are typically approved and run by the housing  sector. Child protection programmes are managed by social affairs. Occupational  health and safety regulations are usually the labour department’s responsibility. And  school-based programmes for social and emotional learning are delivered through  the education sector. Effective promotion and prevention for mental health is a truly multisectoral venture.  The health sector may not be able to implement every strategy or intervention  required. But it can contribute significantly by embedding promotion and prevention  within health services, especially for at-risk populations. The health sector also has  a major role in enabling a society-wide comprehensive and joined-up approach: by  advocating, initiating and, where appropriate, facilitating multisectoral collaboration  and coordination. Some of the strategies available for achieving this are outlined below. In all  cases, successful multisectoral collaboration requires intelligent and appropriate  information sharing, joint planning, strategic design and support, and good delivery.  Multisectoral collaboration is more likely to succeed when there is transformative  leadership to inspire and make the case for action, to focus efforts, and to drive  through the necessary negotiations (see section 5.2.1 Strengthening political will and  engagement). Embed promotion and prevention programmes  within health services The need for a joined-up approach to promotion and prevention actions for mental  health applies within the health sector as much as it does beyond it. Strategies  to embed promotion and prevention programmes within health services include  integrating mental health promotion into perinatal care, nutrition and child health  services as well as disease-specific programmes and clinics. Primary care providers  play a key part in increasing mental health literacy and advocating healthy choices  around diet, exercise and sleep. Primary care providers are also well-placed to  introduce people to evidence-based self-help materials for people in distress. 160

Support mental health  promotion and protection in  non-health settings Given that many interventions to promote and protect  mental health should be delivered in non-health  settings, the health sector has an important role in  supporting colleagues across sectors as they design  and deploy effective interventions. This involves working with schools, prisons  and women’s shelters among others to build  competencies and resilience and empower people.  It also includes working with businesses to support  mental health in the workplace. Advocate for, and provide  expert opinion on, specific  plans and policies By seeking out opportunities to contribute  informed opinion, mental health professionals  can leverage their expertise through advocacy and  thus help ensure that policies, plans and practices  around structural factors are supportive of people’s  mental health. For example, if a new housing settlement is being  planned, mental health experts may comment on  the mental health benefits of including sporting  and recreational facilities (which can increase  participation in community activities), and access  to green space (which has benefits for mental  well-being). They may further comment on the need  for a community mental health centre and group  home for people with mental health conditions.  And they may liaise with transport sector planning  to ensure that people living with mental health  conditions in the new settlement can freely access  mental health services when they need them. Include mental health in  “health in all policies” “Health in all policies” is an established approach  that seeks to systematically consider the health  implications of public policies across sectors. It seeks  synergies and aims to avoid harmful health impacts  (354). It emphasizes the consequences of social and  economic policies on population health and helps  strengthen the accountability of policy-makers for  health impacts at all levels of decision-making. Applying this approach to mental health is essential  to remodel relevant social and economic policies. By  understanding where and how social and structural  factors influence mental health, and embedding this  in government thinking, broad policy is more likely  to enhance mental health, or at the very least avoid  harming it. Establish mechanisms for  collaboration Sometimes, establishing a specific mechanism for  multisectoral collaboration offers the most practical  option for bringing different stakeholders together for  mental health promotion and protection, especially  when it comes to addressing the structural factors  that influence mental health. Such mechanisms can  be set up at different levels of government and with  different stakeholders. Health Promotion Foundations (HPFs), sometimes  called National Health Councils or Commissions, are  multisectoral organizations established through an  Act of Parliament or equivalent to promote health and  prevent diseases. They bring together government  departments, nongovernmental organization,  academics, user groups and others to investigate  root causes and plan effective action. Each sector is  responsible for delivering its part of the action plan.  HPFs are commonly used to combat HIV, TB and NCDs;  but they are under-used for mental health. 161 Chapter 6 Promotion and prevention for change

Joint authorities are similarly established through  an Act of Parliament or equivalent. They typically  include representatives from the ministry of health  as well as high-ranking officials from other ministries,  such as social welfare, justice and home affairs.  They can be effective ways to enable multisectoral  collaboration that tackles the social and structural  factors influencing mental health. Multisectoral task forces or coordination groups  are made up of stakeholders from multiple sectors  who have been convened to achieve a specific  goal, such as preventing suicide or supporting  humanitarian responses. For example, in most large humanitarian emergencies  in LMICs, mental health and psychosocial support  (MHPSS) is coordinated through a multisectoral  working group. MHPSS coordination groups are often  co-chaired by stakeholders from both health and  social sectors. These groups agree and oversee action  across many of the domains that influence mental  health – including health, education, social services,  food, security, shelter and water and sanitation – in  accordance with Inter-Agency Standing Committee  guidelines. During the COVID-19 pandemic the  number of MHPSS coordination groups established at  national level more than doubled from 23 countries  in February 2020 to 54 countries 24 months later.  Importantly, while coordination in MHPSS working  groups cuts across sectors, accountability typically  does not. All sectors agree on an overall action plan  and on the division of labour; and then individual  sectors are responsible for implementing the specific  actions that fall in their domain. During the COVID-19  pandemic the number of  MHPSS coordination groups  established at national level   more than  doubled. 162 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

6.3 Selected priorities for action The Comprehensive mental health action plan  2013–2030 emphasizes the need for a comprehensive approach to promotion and prevention and  commits WHO Member States to develop at least  two functioning national, multisectoral prevention  and promotion programmes by 2030. Only 52% of  WHO Member States currently meet this target (5). As outlined above, prevention and promotion  programmes can focus on numerous topics and  populations. In the rest of this chapter, we will  zoom in on three key priorities (see Fig. 6.2): •	 actions to prevent suicide •	 interventions aimed at children and adolescents •	 interventions in work settings. 6.3.1 Preventing suicide The need to prevent suicide is recognized and  prioritized at the highest international levels. All  UN and WHO Member States have committed  – through the SDGs and Comprehensive mental  health action plan 2013–2030 – to reduce the  global suicide mortality rate by one third by 2030.  The global age standardized rate dropped 10%  between 2013 and 2019, which shows that real  progress is feasible (355). But much more action  is needed to ensure that the global target will be  met by 2030. This is especially so because progress  varies significantly across countries and regions. FIG. 6.2 Selected priorities for action, and associated strategies, to promote and protect  mental health  MENTAL HEALTH  AT WORK 3 Legislation and regulation Organizational strategies Manager mental health training Interventions for workers CHILD AND ADOLESCENT  MENTAL HEALTH 2 Policies and legislation Caregiver support School-based programmes Community and online environments SUICIDE  PREVENTION 1 Limit access to means Interact with media for  responsible reporting Foster social and emotional  learning for adolescents Early intervention 163 Chapter 6 Promotion and prevention for change

NARRATIVE Receiving help guided me to inner  strength and self-awareness Enoch’s experience The pain would not stop. In my head, in my mind,  in my heart. I did not want to live anymore. I was  about to end my life right there and then, and I  was moments away from dying. But I survived.  My boyfriend had come into the room in that split  second and stopped me from what I was about  to do. I started sobbing and wailed in rage. I was  disappointed in myself that I could not kill myself  and felt worse than a failure. Depression meant failing to me. So to find myself  unable to decide what to wear, unable to work,  unable to get out of bed was devastating. When the  doctor suggested I see a therapist, I scoffed at her.  When I eventually went to see a psychologist and  was told I was severely depressed, I smirked. I could  not stomach the fact that I needed help. To me, that  meant I was weak, incompetent. I used to look down upon those who wanted to kill  themselves, for why would anyone give up? I used to  think those who mulled about life and the meaning  of it were too impractical – that earning money and  climbing the corporate ladder would bring stability  and happiness. I strived hard to maintain the image  I thought society wanted to see. I smiled on the  outside, but inside I was empty. I started recovery slowly, through writing, therapy,  playing. I started letting out the emotions I had kept  suppressed. I learned to acknowledge them, and  not berate myself each time I acted them out. These  emotions were all part of me, but I had rejected  them previously. I started to understand that I had a part to play in  the stigma against mental health conditions. The  moment I understood that depression and anxiety  could hit anyone, and it doesn’t make us less of a  person, was the moment I became open to the fact  that I needed others to help me find myself again.  Receiving help did not make me weaker. Rather,  help guided me to ignite my inner strengths and  self-awareness. Enoch Li, China 164 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

In 20 countries, suicide attempts are a criminal  offence, punishable by fines and typically one  to five years in prison (356). But criminalizing  attempted suicide does not stop suicides.  Rather, it increases stigma and undermines  suicide prevention. It prevents people from  seeking life-saving help, and it creates barriers  to implementing policies, delivering effective  support and to getting accurate knowledge on  the size of the problem (356). For countries that  still criminalize suicide, a crucial step to advance  mental health is to change this legal status. All countries should develop, implement  and evaluate a national strategy for suicide  prevention that raises public awareness,  de-stigmatizes suicidal thoughts and behaviours,  encourages people to seek help, and deploys  effective interventions to reduce mortality. To help countries implement this recommendation,  WHO has developed the LIVE LIFE approach to  suicide prevention (357). LIVE LIFE focuses on four  key prevention interventions with proven efficacy. •	 Limiting access to the means of suicide. •	 Interacting with the media for responsible  reporting on suicide. •	 Fostering social and emotional life skills in  adolescents. •	 Early intervention for anyone affected by  suicidal behaviours (read Enoch’s experience). Limit access to the means of suicide Although there is a complex interplay of factors  that lead up to suicide attempts, the path  linking an attempt to a death is simpler and  depends only on the choice of method and any  life-saving response after the attempt (358). Suicide attempts are often impulsive, involving  less than 30 minutes of planning. And the impulse  is frequently brief. More than 90% of people who  present to health care services after deliberate  self-harm do not die from suicide later in life.  This suggests that most survivors of a suicide  attempt usually do not switch to other, more lethal  methods (359). This makes it crucial to reduce  the chance that any suicide attempt is fatal. Accordingly, one of the most straightforward  and impactful policy-based interventions is  to reduce access to lethal means and improve  medical responses after a suicide attempt.  This includes making laws and policies to: •	 Restrict access to means, including banning  highly hazardous pesticides, regulating  firearms, installing barriers at potential jump  sites such as high rises, bridges or metro  platforms, limiting access to ligatures in prisons  and hospitals, and restricting the prescription  of highly toxic medicines. •	 Reduce availability of means, including limiting  how much of a hazardous substance someone  can buy or easily access, for example by  changing the packaging of toxic medicines from  bottles to strip packs. •	 Reduce lethality of means, including  switching to low-risk alternatives, for example  by replacing coal gas with natural gas in  households, or replacing highly hazardous  pesticides with less toxic chemicals or  non-chemical approaches to crop protection. •	 Improve medical treatment, including  increasing the availability and effectiveness of  antidotes after acute intoxication and medical  management after injury. Pesticides account for  1 in 5 suicides  globally. 165 Chapter 6 Promotion and prevention for change

Any regulation aiming to reduce access to means  of suicide should first focus on the most common  and most lethal methods used. This varies from  country to country, as well as within countries  and across socio-demographic groups. Highly hazardous pesticides Pesticide self-poisonings account for up to  one fifth of all suicides globally and are of  particular concern in LMICs, where many people  live in rural, agricultural communities with  easy access to highly hazardous pesticides.  Close to half of all suicides in LMICs in WHO’s  Western Pacific region have been estimated  to be by pesticide poisoning (360). Banning the sale and use of acutely toxic, highly  hazardous pesticides can lead to fewer deaths  by suicide. It is a low-cost intervention, which  is highly cost–effective in countries with a high  burden of pesticide self-poisonings (222, 361).  National bans have been linked to a drop in  pesticide suicides in Bangladesh, Jordan, Republic  of Korea, Sri Lanka and in Taiwan, China (see Fig.  6.3 and Box 6.5 Sri Lanka: banning pesticides  to prevent suicide) (362). In the Republic of  Korea, a ban on the highly hazardous pesticide  paraquat in 2012 resulted in an immediate and  clear decline in pesticide self-poisoning suicides  and contributed to a marked decline in overall  suicide rates across all population groups (see  Fig. 6.3). Such declines have not been associated  with reductions in agricultural yield (363). FIG. 6.3 National bans on highly hazardous pesticides and reduction in deaths by suicide Sources: Korea: WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Sri Lanka: Duleeka Knipe, University of Bristol, unpublished data, April 2022, updated from Knipe, [PHONE_REDACTED]. Total suicides Suicide rate % suicides by pesticide SRI LANKA REPUBLIC OF KOREA Number of suicides (000) Proportion of suicides by pesticide (%) [PHONE_REDACTED]Crude suicide rate (per [PHONE_REDACTED]Ban (parathion and methyl parathion) Ban (all WHO class I toxicity) Ban (endosulfan) [PHONE_REDACTED]Ban (dimethoate,  fenthion, paraquat) [PHONE_REDACTED]Ban (paraquat) 166 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

167 Chapter 6 Promotion and prevention for change

BOX 6.5 Sri Lanka: banning pesticides to prevent suicide When Sri Lanka’s government drew up the Control of  Pesticides Act in 1980, pesticide poisoning accounted  for more than two-thirds of all suicides in the country. In 1984, the Office of the Registrar of Pesticides  began using its powers under the new Act to ban  highly hazardous pesticides, starting with two  organophosphorus insecticides (parathion and  methyl parathion). Within ten years, all remaining  highly hazardous WHO class I toxicity pesticides had  been banned. In 1994, a Presidential Commission  was established to draft a national policy and action  plan on suicide prevention, and to coordinate action  across multiple government agencies, including  agriculture. Further bans in 1998 (endosulfan) and  2008 (dimethoate, fenthion and paraquat) boosted  the decline. In total Sri Lanka banned 36 highly  hazardous pesticides. By 2016, the annual suicide rate had fallen more than  70% to 14 per [PHONE_REDACTED]. The Ministry of Health continues to work on suicide  prevention in multiple departments and the overall  suicide rate now stands at around 25% of its peak.  The national policy, and how it is implemented,  is regularly reviewed by a Pesticide Technical and  Advisory Committee, which is made up of many  stakeholders within government. The committee also  regularly engages the pesticide industry to ensure  wide buy-in and cooperation. Together, the bans are estimated to have saved  [PHONE_REDACTED]lives between 1995 and 2015, at a direct  government cost of US$ 43 for each life saved.  Thousands of lives continue to be saved every year.  Strong cooperation of farmers and agricultural  suppliers mean that crops could be effectively grown  using alternative pesticides so agricultural output has  not been affected. Sources: Knipe et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Jeyaratnam et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Pearson et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. CASE STUDY Interact with the media for responsible  reporting of suicide Media reporting can have a major influence in  shaping public opinion and attitudes about  suicide. There is evidence that glamourized  coverage of high-profile suicide cases or  detailed descriptions of attempts can lead to  imitation suicides (368). Conversely, stories  that include information on where to seek  help contribute to suicide prevention (369). Working with the media for responsible  reporting can include collaborations to: •	 build capacity of journalists through training or  guideline development; or •	 regulate coverage of suicide, including  identifying and correcting (or deleting) articles  that fail to meet established standards. 168 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

CASE STUDY In Lithuania, for example, journalists and psychologists have worked together to develop a code  of ethics for public information to guide suicide  reporting in the country. A Suicide Prevention  Bureau reviews around 30 reports of suicide  or suicide attempts in the online media every  working day to ensure compliance with the  code. For every article that is found to breach  the code, the bureau contacts the editor of the  publication and requests a correction (357). Working with the media can include  collaborations at all levels, from regional to  local, and all platforms, including television,  radio, newspapers and social media. Foster social and emotional life skills  in adolescents The LIVE LIFE approach recommends  implementing WHO and UNICEF’s Helping  Adolescents Thrive (HAT) guidelines, which  advocate social and emotional life skills training  in schools alongside a range of other initiatives  to promote and protect the mental health of  adolescents, including anti-bullying programmes,  support on how to stay connected and safe  online and offline, gatekeeper training for  teachers, mental health literacy initiatives for  parents and extra support to high-risk students  (see section 6.3.2 Protecting and promoting  child and adolescent mental health). BOX 6.6 Guyana: building capacities for suicide prevention Suicide prevention has been a government priority  in Guyana since 2014. Action is directed by two  national plans for mental health and suicide; and  led by a national Mental Health Unit within the  Ministry of Public Health. Part of this action focuses on scaling up capacities  for suicide prevention among primary health  care providers. In 2015, the Pan American Health  Organization (PAHO) began training these health care  workers in identifying and managing risk for suicide  and providing appropriate follow-up care. PAHO used  a virtual campus to deliver an online course based on  the WHO mhGAP-IG to physicians. Since then, more than 300 health care providers  have been trained to assess, manage and follow  up common mental health conditions and suicide/ self-harm. More than a third of these are doctors  working in primary health care. In addition, gatekeeper training is being planned and  implemented to involve informal care providers in  suicide prevention. This includes training teachers  to recognize mental health issues in children and  adolescents, and refer them to appropriate services.  Source: WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 169 Chapter 6 Promotion and prevention for change

Early intervention for those affected by  suicidal behaviours The fourth priority intervention in the LIVE  LIFE approach lies in the early identification,  assessment, management and follow up of  anyone affected by suicidal behaviours. This  includes equipping anyone who is likely to  encounter someone at risk – including all health  workers and relevant community providers  such as teachers – with the competencies to  guide people to the support they need. It also  includes providing follow up support to anyone  who may have been bereaved by suicide. Early intervention is important across the full  spectrum of health services. WHO’s mhGAP  Intervention Guide (mhGAP-IG) includes  tools and training materials to support  clinical decision-making and management by  non-specialized health workers (see Box 6.6 Guyana:  building capacities for suicide prevention) (244). Community-led services have an important role in  supporting people affected by suicidal behaviours  through survivors’ groups and self-help groups  facilitated by survivors with lived experience.  Schools and other learning environments  also have a role in providing support to those  experiencing suicidal thoughts and behaviours by  offering guidance on where and how to seek help.  And other sectors, such as social welfare, also have  a part to play in supporting survivors who may, for  example, need help accessing work or benefits. 6.3.2 Protecting and  promoting child and  adolescent mental health Infancy, childhood and adolescence are ages of  both vulnerability and opportunity in mental  health. This is a time when children acquire  the cognitive, social and emotional attributes  and skills they need to thrive as adults. Childhood and adolescence is also a time of  life when we are highly susceptible to environmental influences. Nurturing caregiving and  supportive learning environments can be hugely  protective of future mental health. On the other  hand, adverse childhood experiences in homes,  schools or digital spaces increase the risk of  experiencing mental health conditions (see  section 2.2 Determinants of mental health). Nurturing caregiving and supportive  learning environments can be  hugely protective of mental health. Informed by WHO’s evidence-based guidelines  the sections that follow consider the rationale  and options for universal promotion and  prevention across four platforms (370, 371): •	 policies and legislation •	 caregiver support •	 school-based programmes •	 environments outside school. Policies and legislation International frameworks such as the UN  Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC)  commit all countries to promote and protect  child and adolescent mental health. The CRPD  complements the CRC and includes an article on  protecting the rights of children with disabilities,  including psychosocial disabilities. Together,  they support access to care and social inclusion  for children with mental health conditions. National policies, plans and laws that align with  these human rights instruments are critical to  developing appropriate systems of mental health  care for young people. Yet in 2020, fewer than half  of WHO Member States reported having a plan or  strategy for child and adolescent mental health (5). For young children, laws and policies that  support caregivers in providing nurturing care  170 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

NARRATIVE This illness stole precious moments  from me and my girls Olivia’s experience Before becoming a mum I thought motherhood  would be, yes, tiring and overwhelming at times,  but mostly I expected it to be a period of joy and  happiness. Not once did I think it would in fact be one  of the darkest times of my life. Both my girls were born prematurely and after giving  birth to my eldest I immediately started to experience  symptoms of psychosis. I felt deeply depressed and  anxious, was plagued with irrational beliefs and fears,  and had severe panic attacks. My symptoms went  unrecognized by myself and undiagnosed by the  medical staff taking care of me. My first psychotic episode took place a few months  later. I’d settled my daughter down in her nursery  and then experienced the most terrifying of visions.  I saw demons flying around our house, saying they  were here to kill my daughter. I began living with  what I came to call my “dark stranger”: a shadowy  figure who would appear unexpectedly telling me  I was in danger and that my daughter would be  better off without me. I became filled with terror. I  didn’t want to see family and friends and felt like I  was trapped in my own horror film. My symptoms  were not cared for correctly, and I experienced them  again during my second pregnancy and for several  months after. My recovery was slow and at times  challenging and debilitating. I’ve had to come to terms with the fact that this  illness stole precious moments from me and my girls  that I will never get back. But this realization and  my acceptance of it has been my drive to help other  women in the same situation. I passionately believe  that every woman going into motherhood should be  educated on how to take care of their mental health.  All women should be informed of the symptoms and  know where to get support if they need it. Since recovering I have published a book about my  experiences. I also set up The Letters of Light Project:  a peer-to-peer initiative that sends handwritten  letters of support from women with lived experience  of maternal mental health issues to women who are  receiving maternal mental health care around the  world. And I have been part of the editorial team for  the World mental health report: transforming mental  health for all. These are all projects I am incredibly  proud of. And I get to share them with my daughters  so they know that suffering with a mental health  condition is not a weakness or a source of shame.  People with lived experience are courageous people  whose insight and experiences are invaluable for  progressing mental health care worldwide. Olivia Gascoigne Siegl, United Kingdom 171 Chapter 6 Promotion and prevention for change

are especially important (18). For adolescents,  laws and policies can also be important to reduce  common risk behaviours such as self-harm,  substance use and risky sexual behaviours (372). Multiple sectors have a role in creating enabling  policy and legislative environments for child  and adolescent mental health. For example,  health policies set the standards for mental  health services and provide universal coverage.  Social welfare policies protect families against  economic and social adversity. And education  policies secure access to learning opportunities. Caregiver support Caregivers have a crucial role in promoting and  protecting their children’s mental health by  providing nurturing care throughout childhood  and adolescence. Supporting caregiver health and well-being Even before we are born our parents’ mental  health can impact our own. Poor nutrition,  exposure to drugs or toxins, maternal infections  or stress and birth complications can all adversely  affect fetal development and put a child’s later  mental health at risk (373). Pregnant women with  untreated depression or anxiety are more likely to  have birth complications or die during pregnancy,  and to have a low-birthweight baby (374). After birth and beyond,  many caregivers experience  psychological distress. After birth and beyond, many caregivers experience  psychological distress. Especially when this distress  amounts to depression or psychosis, there can be  serious consequences for both caregivers and their  children (read Olivia’s experience). For example,  depression and anxiety can impair a mother’s  ability to bond with her baby. Preventive interventions that support caregiver  mental health both before and after birth can  make considerable contributions to preventing  mental health conditions in children (375).  One meta-analysis has suggested that, when  these interventions reach caregivers who are  already experiencing a mental health condition,  they could reduce the risk of mental health  conditions in their children by 40% (376). Reducing caregiver stress and supporting caregiver  well-being – including through home visiting  interventions – is particularly valuable during  pregnancy and early infancy (377). Maternal  mental health care should be integrated into  early childhood health and development services  because of the indirect benefits on caregiving  and child development outcomes (370). Continuing support for caregiver well-being  also has the potential to positively influence the  development and mental health outcomes of  older children and adolescents. WHO and UNICEF’s  HAT initiative to promote mental well-being  and prevent mental health conditions among  adolescents emphasizes the importance of  intervening with caregivers who are more likely to  experience difficulties that could adversely affect  their parenting (372). This includes caregivers  who live in humanitarian settings, are victims  or survivors of violence or who have a mental  health condition or chronic physical illness. All caregivers who live in stressful circumstances can benefit from extra support. In 2020  the Parenting for Lifelong Health programme  developed the COVID-19 Parenting Resources  to reduce caregiver stress and lessen the risk of  violence against children during the pandemic  (378). Through tip sheets, interactive text messages,  online parent support groups, phone-based  counselling and more, the resources use a strategic  approach to deliver messages to support caregivers  and children during the pandemic. More than  210 million people accessed these resources  during the first two years of the pandemic. 172 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

Skills for caregiving Parenting programmes focus on equipping  caregivers with the skills they need to provide  nurturing care and a safe and stable environment  for their children. Programmes for caregivers of  newborns often focus on breastfeeding support,  which helps establish a sense of attachment and  comfort that contributes to mental health (379). Programmes for young children’s caregivers  tend to focus on responsive care and learning,  including preschool enrolment (370). Experience  from around the world suggests that parenting  programmes during early childhood can  effectively reduce coercive parenting, improve  children’s problem-solving behaviour and  social functioning at home and school, and help  prevent behavioural problems, many of which  have their onset in preschool periods (380). Programmes for adolescents’ caregivers may  focus on (372): •	 Support to promote nurturing family  environments, including support to increase  caregivers’ involvement in parenting and ability  to provide appropriate structure and supervision. •	 Skills to strengthen caregiver–adolescent  communication and relationships. •	 Skills to strengthen positive parenting and  protect adolescents from exposure to violence,  including skills for setting limits and rules,  promoting praise and positive reinforcements  and reducing harsh punishment. •	 Knowledge to increase caregivers’  understanding of mental health and adolescent  development, including the psychological,  social, physical and sexual changes that happen  during adolescence. •	 Support for family social networks and  community connectiveness. Caregivers of children with developmental delays  and disabilities may benefit from specific support  because they are likely to experience high levels  of distress. Experience shows that participating in  parenting programmes such as WHO’s Caregiver  Skills Training (CST) can empower these caregivers  to foster their children’s learning, social communication and adaptive behaviour (381, 382). Pregnant adolescents and adolescent caregivers  can also benefit from parenting programmes  that, for example, build awareness of the  mental health challenges they may face and link  them to crucial support and services (372). School-based programmes Schools are one of the most important settings  for mental health promotion and protection  among children and adolescents. They can be  places that nurture well-being, equipping students  with the knowledge, skills, competencies and  lifestyles they need to thrive. For children whose  home environment is not safe and nurturing,  school can be a crucial safety net supporting  basic social, emotional, and physical needs.  But schools can also be places that undermine  well-being, for example by exposing students to  bullying, racism, discrimination, peer pressure and  excessive stress about academic performance. To be effective, each intervention in a  school-based promotion and prevention  programme requires active engagement and  support from students, teachers, caregivers  and communities. To develop a positive school  climate, a whole-school health-promoting  approach is needed (372). In turn, such  an approach supports better health and  educational outcomes and influences health  behaviours, to the benefit of students, school  personnel and the broader community (383). 173 Chapter 6 Promotion and prevention for change

TOOL BOX 6.7 A school mental health training package for the Eastern Mediterranean WHO’s Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean  (EMRO) has developed a training package for  educators to better understand the importance of  mental health in a school setting and implement  strategies to promote, protect and restore mental  health among their students. Still in the early stages of implementation, the EMRO  package includes training manuals and materials  to help scale up the number of “mental health  promoting schools” that are able to: •	 support their children’s social and emotional  development; •	 promote mental health and well-being at all levels; •	 provide age-appropriate behavioural management  strategies; and •	 identify and address early signs and symptoms of  mental health conditions. Source: EMRO, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 174 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

A key component of a health-promoting school is  a safe and supportive school social and emotional  environment. This can be nurtured by training  educators (see Box 6.7 A school mental health  training package for the Eastern Mediterranean). In all cases, school-based prevention and  promotion programmes should be linked with  other mental health and social services, which  may be provided on- or off-site (see section  7.4.1 Mental health care in non-health settings:  Early detection and intervention in schools). Social and emotional learning programmes School-based programmes for social and  emotional learning are linked to mental health  benefits in countries at all income levels (385).  They can be delivered for all school ages and  are well proven to improve students’ emotional  well-being, social functioning and academic  performance. They are also associated with  a reduced risk of depression, anxiety and  stress; and prevention of suicide, harmful  substance use, antisocial behaviour and  health-risking sexual practices (see section  6.3.1 Preventing suicide: foster social and  emotional life skills in adolescents) (386). WHO and UNICEF’s HAT initiative advocates  a broad approach to school-based social and  emotional learning that uses a mix of interventions  to build mental health awareness, strengthen  emotional, cognitive, and social skills, and engage  in physical activity (see Table 6.[PHONE_REDACTED], 387). TABLE 6.3 Psychosocial interventions for social and emotional learning LEARNING GOAL INTERVENTION Emotional Emotion  regulation Techniques to improve one’s ability to manage and respond to  emotions effectively Stress  management Techniques to control levels of stress, especially chronic stress,  that interferes with everyday functioning Mindfulness Activities to enhance abilities to pay attention purposefully, in the  present and without judgment Cognitive Problem solving Techniques to identify and act on a solution to a challenge or  difficult problem Drug and alcohol  knowledge Education about the use of drugs and alcohol, and their effects Social Interpersonal  skills Improving skills to develop or improve close, strong and positive  relationships with others Assertiveness Improving skills to communicate one’s viewpoint, needs or wishes  clearly and respectfully Physical Physical activity Opportunities to engage in sports or physical activity, either  individually or in teams Source: adapted from WHO and UNICEF, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 175 Chapter 6 Promotion and prevention for change

NARRATIVE Bullying was the perfect soil for my  depression to grow Benny’s experience My first experience of racist bullying was when I was  in second grade. My neighbourhood peers saw me  and yelled at me to go back to China. I was only eight  years of age and already felt unwelcome and unsafe  in my closest environment. I had active asthma and my parents were very  protective of my health. I was mocked as a mama’s  boy; the weak asthma kid. I used to cry to cope with  the bullying, rejection and frustration. By the time  I was an adolescent, I had become very sensitive. I  tried to be more assertive and bold in stating what I  thought and felt. But I was being bullied more than  ever. I had started having physical health issues  and came from a different religious background to  many of my peers. The passive aggressive gestures  and microaggressions toward my religious identity  became a soft method for their bullying. These experiences made me very aware of the fact  that people can be very ignorant and hateful towards  diversity and conditions they know nothing about.  They made me wonder why people cannot accept  others for identities they have no power to choose,  why they inflict suffering toward others, and what  happiness and harmony should look like. I had  nobody to ask these questions to, leading to a greater  sense of alienation. I constantly felt like I was less than those who hated  me; and that I had to prove I could do better than all  of them. This long-term and multi-layered impact of  bullying also made me feel lonely and worthless. It  became the perfect soil for my depression to grow.  It took years for me to realize that bullying had  disrupted my way of relating to myself and others. Benny, Indonesia Universal school-based social and emotional  learning programmes can be embedded into the  usual school curriculum and delivered by teachers.  For example, a Canadian Mental Health Curriculum  has been adapted for use in classrooms in Malawi,  Nicaragua and the United Republic of Tanzania,  where it has shown self-reported improvements  in mental health literacy and help-seeking as well  as reduced negative attitudes (388, 389, 390). Such programmes are not only effective but  can bring good economic returns (222). One  investment case for the Philippines calculated that  the return on investment (including productivity  gains and the social value of health) of universal  school-based social and emotional learning  programmes was 14.8 to 1 over 20 years (132). 176 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

Anti-bullying interventions Within any school-based promotion and prevention  programme, anti-bullying interventions are  especially important. Bullying can take many forms: physical, verbal and  psychological. Nearly one in three adolescents are  estimated to be victims of bullying in the past 30  days (391). People who are bullied as a child are  more likely to experience emotional distress and  mental health conditions and to have problems  adjusting to school (392). Bullying can also result  in isolation, low self-esteem and self-harm (read  Benny’s experience). Anyone involved in bullying – those  who bully or are bullied – are more  likely to get depression and anxiety. Childhood bullies themselves are more likely  to have academic problems in the short term  and are more likely to engage in harmful  substance use, antisocial behaviour and  interpersonal violence later in life (392). Anyone  involved in bullying – those who bully and/ or are bullied – are more likely to experience  a mental health condition (393, 394). School-based anti-bullying programmes focus  on addressing factors in the school that foster  bullying behaviour. They can be implemented  in different ways, from parental and peer  support interventions to staff and student  awareness-raising and social and emotional skill  building. Overall, school-based anti-bullying  programmes have been found to be effective  in reducing bullying by approximately 20%  (395). Analysis suggests that the most successful  interventions use a multi-level, whole-school  approach that includes implementing an  anti-bullying policy and classroom rules  (including accountability mechanisms),  providing information for parents, involving  peers and enabling cooperative group work. In addition to reducing bullying rates, anti-bullying  programmes can reduce subsequent aggression  and emotional problems in adolescents (396).  They may even have an impact on psychosis rates,  given the link between bullying and psychotic  experiences (397). Environments outside school Beyond school, children and adolescents spend  a lot of time in communities and, these days, in  online environments. Moreover, there are millions  of children and adolescents out of school. It is  important to ensure that environments outside  school are safe and healthy and that they enhance  mental health outcomes and facilitate access to  resources and support. Adolescents who live in safe, well-resourced  neighbourhoods or participate in extracurricular  social, physical, creative or playful activities  such as youth clubs, sports teams or arts groups  have improved mental well-being compared  with those who do not. Conversely, adolescents  who live in communities with high levels of  adversity or conflict are more likely to have  poorer mental health. So any intervention  that successfully addresses violence and other  adversity in the community can be considered  promotive. So too can interventions such as  safe spaces that support opportunities for  children and adolescents to play (398). There is much concern around children’s use  of the Internet and social media (4). Around  the world, children and adolescents have  different experiences in accessing and using  the Internet, with different risks and benefits.  Some young people have little or no access  to digital technologies and the internet; some  have recurrent but irregular access; some have  regular access but are limited in their use of  them by personal or caregiver concerns; and  some have regular access with no support or  barriers to use (399). 177 Chapter 6 Promotion and prevention for change

TOOL For those who can access the Internet, online  environments can be an important source of  entertainment, social support and learning. This  has been especially true during the COVID-19  pandemic, with the Internet providing a platform  for attending classes and socializing with friends,  as well as information on how to cope with  COVID-19 related stressors (see Box 6.8 My hero  is you: a children’s book for COVID-19). Of course,  many children had no Internet access during the  pandemic, or only limited access that made online  learning and socializing very difficult. BOX 6.8 My hero is you: a children’s book for COVID-19 My hero is you: how kids can fight COVID-19 is a book  for school-aged children explaining how they can  protect themselves, their families and their friends  from COVID-19 and how to manage difficult emotions  when confronted with rapidly changing reality. The book was made available in 2020, in more than  140 languages and numerous adaptations, including  animated video, theatre, activity books and audio  formats. It came with a guide for parents on how  to read the book with their children, explaining  how adults can create safe spaces for children to  openly share their feelings, including their fears and  worries, about COVID-19 and frustrations at their  changed daily lives. A sequel, My hero is you 2021: how kids can hope with  COVID-19 addressed children’s changing concerns  during the second year of the pandemic and is  available in 28 languages, showing the continued  interest in countries to provide children with  information on coping with COVID-19 related stressors. Sources: IASC, [PHONE_REDACTED]; IASC, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 178 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

NARRATIVE A toxic work environment left me  unable to function Larry’s experience  I loved my work but I grew to hate it as I was working  in a toxic environment. A lengthy and unpleasant  matter at work was sending my mind reeling  into panic attacks, anxiety, and depression. My  doctor said I had moderate to severe depression. I  maintained a façade of happiness but I would hide in  my office in tears, trying unsuccessfully to maintain  some level of self-control. I took time off. On my first return to work, I was utterly overwhelmed  and took more time off. On my second return,  organizational changes made in my absence meant  I started to dread my weekly work meetings. It made  me ill just thinking about it. I was unable to function  at work for several days. I felt like a target. My normal duties were being  eroded and the authority of my role was diminished  without any consultation. I reached out to my  professional association and human resources for  help, but no action was taken to support me. Exasperated, feeling cornered, and unable to function  in my role I resigned. Following my resignation my  personal feelings blazed chaotically between mental  anguish, lack of control, isolation, fear, sorrow,  intimidation, disbelief, frustration, disappointment,  extreme worry for the well-being of my former team,  anger about the impact on my 20-year career and,  periodically, relief. The happiness, optimism, and trust in others that  used to define me are still mostly absent. I work  on those. This was the single most tumultuous  experience in my life, but I have no regret as I chose  to put my personal sanity and mental health first.  In the end, I learned a great deal about myself  and what is important to me. This opportunity for  self-reflection is the unseen benefit. Larry White, Canada When young people spend time online and on  social media they can also be exposed to mental  health risks such as cyberbullying, cyberstalking,  grooming, developmentally inappropriate content,  misinformation and unhealthy role models. Social  media use can also interfere with sleep (402).  And social media breeds social comparison, with  adolescents frequently thinking they compare  poorly with others (403). So while social media  helps many adolescents make connections  and explore new ideas and information, it also  undermines self-esteem and body image. The impact of Internet use on mental health,  cognitive development and social connectedness  – both positive and negative – remains a topic  of concern and is a priority for investigation. 179 Chapter 6 Promotion and prevention for change

Meanwhile, three interventions in particular are  considered promising in promoting safe and  healthy engagement online for adolescents (372): •	 Adolescent training programmes to strengthen  skills in how to use the Internet responsibly and  safely and to reduce online-related risks such as  cyberbullying and victimization. •	 Parenting programmes to train caregivers on  how to promote their adolescent’s safe use of  the Internet, including setting rules, monitoring  use and encouraging responsible engagement. •	 Technological tools to promote online safety  by enabling negative content to be filtered  and blocked, including caregiver controls,  self-regulation tools, language screening  software, and reporting systems. 6.3.3 Promoting and  protecting mental health  at work Workplaces can be places of both opportunity  and risk for mental health. On the one hand,  workplaces that promote good mental health  and reduce work stress not only enhance  mental and physical health but are also  likely to reduce absenteeism, improve work  performance and productivity, boost staff  morale and motivation, and minimize tension  and conflict between colleagues. So action  to protect and promote mental health in the  workplace can be cost–effective (404). Workplaces can be places  of both opportunity and  risk for mental health. On the other hand, unemployment, discrimination  in accessing or carrying out work, and poor  working conditions can all be a source of  excessive stress, heightening the risk of  developing new mental health conditions or  exacerbating existing ones (20). Such negative  working environments and experiences are  the very opposite of what is needed for staff  to do their work (read Larry’s experience). Some workers, such as health, humanitarian  or emergency workers, are more likely to be  exposed to adverse experiences at work. This is  partly because of the nature of their work (for  example, exposure to potentially traumatic events)  but also because of the way their job may be  designed (for example, high workload, long hours,  shift work or work at unsociable hours). This  adversity puts workers at risk of negative impacts  to their mental health (405, 406). The COVID-19  pandemic has highlighted the heavy workloads  carried by health workers, and the potential  consequences for their mental health (see  Chapter 2, In focus: COVID-19 and mental health).  Yet such burdens and consequences were known  to risk depression and suicidal behaviours  even before the pandemic (405, 407). Most initiatives for work-related mental health  focus on the formal employment sector. Yet the  informal economy – where there are no formal  regulations, work is precarious, and workers lack  access to social protections – accounts for more  than 60% of all global employment, and more than  69% of employment in LMICs (408). These workers  face threats to their mental and physical health  through lack of structural support or recognition  for their work and often also face poor working  conditions and societal discrimination, all of which  may also impede use of mental health services. The Comprehensive mental health action plan  2013–2030 emphasizes the need for countries to  promote safe, supportive and decent working  conditions for all, including informal workers.  It further recommends that countries address  discrimination in the workplace and promote  full access to work participation for people  with mental health conditions. Despite this  commitment, work-related promotion and  180 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

prevention programmes for mental health were  among the least frequently reported by countries  (35%) in the Mental health atlas [PHONE_REDACTED]. In 2022, following extensive evidence  reviews, WHO will publish the first ever global  guidelines on mental health and work. These  will highlight the importance of key strategies  for preventing mental ill-health including: •	 organizational interventions •	 manager mental health training •	 interventions for workers. In each case, legislation and regulations are  important to ensure these strategies – and  others to support workers with mental health  conditions – are effectively implemented. While the upcoming guidelines are based on the  latest evidence available, there is still much to  learn about what works, and for who, when it  comes to supporting mental health at work. Strong  collaboration between employers and academia is  important to gather evidence on the effectiveness  of different approaches (409). Interacting with,  and listening to, workers to get their perspectives on what they need is just as important. Legislation and regulation At national and international levels, legislation  and regulation encourage and enforce action to  promote and protect mental health at work. For  example, the International Labour Organization  (ILO) Convention on Occupational Safety and  Health (No. 155) and its Recommendation  (No 164) call on countries to protect workers’  physical and mental health by developing and  implementing national policies in occupational  safety and health. The convention provides  an impetus for employers to integrate mental  health into their own workplace policies  and is thus a key enabler of organizational  interventions (see Organizational interventions). Other international conventions similarly enable  organizational interventions to support people  living with mental health conditions. Article 27 of  the CRPD for example calls for the protection of  rights of persons with disabilities in recruitment,  hiring, employment and career advancement  through accommodations at work (410). Workplaces can be reticent to hire people with  mental health conditions on the misguided  assumption that they require more resources,  more supervision, have less initiative, cannot  deal with customers, or that there are trust issues  (411). Laws that compel non-discriminatory  practices for all workers can help to uphold  people’s rights. But changing stigmatizing  attitudes requires complementary action, for  example to address misconceptions about mental  health conditions and increase employers’  understanding about how to make reasonable  adjustments to recruit and support prospective  workers with mental health conditions. At the national level, a diverse range of  employment laws and policies can be used  to establish an enabling environment for  protecting workers’ mental health (see Box  6.9 Promoting mental health in workplaces in  the Philippines). This includes regulations on  violence and harassment as well as laws and  policies on minimum wage, equality, health,  safety, parental leave and flexible working. 181 Chapter 6 Promotion and prevention for change

CASE STUDY BOX 6.9 Promoting mental health in workplaces in the Philippines In 2020, the Department for Labor and Employment  in the Philippines issued new guidelines for all  employers in the private sector to implement a  mental health workplace policy and programme. The guidelines are enshrined in law through various  acts of government and apply to all workplaces and  establishments in the formal sector, including those  that deploy Filipino migrant workers overseas. The new guidelines make it mandatory for all  employers to establish and implement a mental  health workplace policy and programme that: •	 raises awareness about mental health in the  workplace •	 prevents stigma and discrimination •	 promotes a healthy lifestyle and work-life balance •	 supports workers with mental health conditions  and facilitates access to mental health services. The guidelines are clear that mental health workplace  policies and programmes should be co-developed  by management and workers’ representatives, and  regularly monitored and evaluated. All employers  must submit annual reviews of their policies and  programmes to the Department of Labor and  Employment. And those that do not comply with the  new guidelines may be fined. Source: Department of Labor and Employment, [PHONE_REDACTED]. Organizational interventions Organizational strategies to promote and  protect mental health in the workplace cover  interventions that reshape working conditions  to reduce workers’ exposure to mental health  risks. These psychosocial risks may be related  to the nature of the work undertaken, the  physical, social or cultural characteristics of  the workplace, or opportunities for career  development, among other things (see Table  6.[PHONE_REDACTED]. These are risks known to adversely  impact mental health outcomes. For example,  high job demands, low job control, job insecurity,  low relational and procedural justice, bullying  and low social support in the workplace  are associated with a greater likelihood of  developing mental health problems (20). Violence and harassment at work, in particular,  violate human rights and can cause long-lasting  harm to mental health (414). Violence and  harassment are often enabled by structural  factors (for example, gender biases) that  foster a negative workplace culture. Removing or mitigating risks to mental health  at work can in part be achieved by integrating  mental health into an organization’s workplace  policies on occupational safety and health  (see Box 6.10 SOLVE: integrating mental health  into workplace policies). This action helps  to ensure that employers meet the requirements of national and international labour  standards (see Legislation and regulation). 182 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

TABLE 6.4 Examples of risks to mental health at work  POTENTIAL RISK EXAMPLES  Job content / task design •	 Lack of variety in the work •	 Under-use of skills or under-skilled for work •	 Insecure or informal working Workload and work pace •	 Heavy workload Work schedule •	 Long work hours •	 Shift working •	 Inflexible hours Job control •	 Lack of control over workload •	 Limited participation in decision-making about one’s own work Environment and  equipment •	 Poor physical working conditions Organizational culture and  function •	 Poor communication •	 Unclear organizational objectives •	 Limited opportunities for personal development •	 Workplace culture that enables violence, harassment,  discrimination or bullying Interpersonal relationships  at work •	 Limited support from supervisors or colleagues •	 Violence, harassment and bullying Discrimination •	 Any discrimination based on identifying factors such as race,  ethnicity, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion or age •	 Discrimination against indigenous peoples, migrants and people  with disabilities, including psychosocial disabilities Role in organization •	 Unclear job role within the organization or team Career development •	 Under promotion or over promotion •	 Job insecurity •	 Poor pay Home-work interface •	 Conflicting demands between work and non-work life Source:  ILO, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 183 Chapter 6 Promotion and prevention for change

184 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

TOOL BOX 6.10 SOLVE: integrating mental health into workplace policies on occupational safety  and health The SOLVE training package, developed by  ILO, provides practical guidance for managers,  supervisors and others on how to integrate mental  health into their organizations’ workplace policies  and practices on occupational safety and health. Designed to support the ILO Occupational Safety  and Health Convention (No. 155), the SOLVE training  package covers three main targets for policy design  and action: •	 psychosocial health, including stress,  psychological and physical violence, and  economic stressors; •	 potential addictions, including tobacco, alcohol  and drug consumption; and •	 lifestyle habits, including diet, exercise and  healthy sleep. SOLVE aims to provide participants with the  knowledge and skills they need to integrate each  of these topics into their own occupational safety  and health policies. To that end it uses a social  dialogue approach, involving employers, workers,  governments, public services and nongovernmental  organization. Sources: ILO, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Probst et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. Specific organizational interventions for  mental health include (418, 419): •	 providing flexible working arrangements; •	 involving workers in decision-making,  for example on their job design, through  participatory approaches; and •	 modifying workloads or work schedules to  promote and enable a healthy work-life balance. Organizational interventions designed to support  people living with mental health conditions  may also include facilitating the provision of  reasonable accommodations, so that workers are  supported to access or continue work. In many  cases, supported employment programmes  may be needed to create opportunities for  competitive work for those at disproportionate  risk of exclusion, including people living  with severe mental health conditions. In all cases, organizations can help foster  participation in work activities by providing  adapted working conditions to match the  capacities and needs of workers with mental  health conditions. This may include allowing  flexible hours of work, extra time to complete  tasks and time off when needed to seek mental  health care (420). It may include access to private  spaces such as somewhere to store medication  or somewhere to rest when necessary. And it  may include ensuring supportive relationships  with managers and redesigning jobs, for  example to avoid interacting with clients if  the worker finds this unduly stressful. 185 Chapter 6 Promotion and prevention for change

Efforts to adapt working conditions may also  be beneficial for people returning from absence  associated with mental health conditions. If  the worker agrees, other stakeholders (such as  mental health care providers) may also have  a role in supporting their return to work. Anti-stigma action is critical to ensure workers  experiencing difficulties with their mental  health feel supported and able to ask for extra  support if they need it, without fear of repercussions or judgement. Indeed, reducing  stigma at work is vital to the success of  efforts to support mental health at work. Manager mental health training Mental health training for managers  and supervisors is about strengthening  knowledge, skills, attitudes and behaviours  so that managers may better support their  workers’ mental health needs (421). Training may focus on supporting managers’  specific mental health needs, for example looking  at how to regulate emotions in response to work  stressors. Or it may focus on helping managers  identify and reduce work-related risk factors for  their supervisees, for example by finding ways  to manage workloads during busy periods. Training can also include developing knowledge  about mental health and learning how to  identify and support supervisees that may be  experiencing emotional distress. In these cases,  the intention is not for managers to become  mental health care providers. Rather it is about  enabling appropriate awareness and response,  for example using active listening skills and,  where appropriate, referring people to sources  of support within or beyond the workplace. Interventions for workers Interventions for workers often focus on  increasing coping capacity to manage stressors.  This includes stress management training using  mindfulness-based or cognitive-behavioural  approaches as well as strategies to promote  leisure-based physical activity (see section  5.4.4 Competencies for self-care). Increasing  the amount of social support available for  employees can also help individuals cope  with a stressful situation by mobilizing group  problem-solving and positive team functioning. Stress management interventions  should be delivered along with  organizational interventions  that address psychosocial risks  and manager training. The evidence supporting stress management  approaches for workers is clear (422). The ease  with which stress management options can be  delivered to a workforce render them popular  and appealing. But to ensure a holistic approach  to workers’ mental health, these interventions  should be delivered as part of a comprehensive  package of interventions that also includes  organizational interventions that address  psychosocial risks and manager training. This  is because a single focus on interventions for  individuals can generate a sense of personal  blame for people experiencing understandable  stress responses to difficult work circumstances. 186 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

7 Restructuring  and scaling up  care for impact COMMUNITY-BASED CARE  INTEGRATED SERVICES  COMMUNITY MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES  SERVICES BEYOND THE HEALTH SECTOR 

Chapter summary In this chapter we explore the major restructuring and scaling up  required to transform mental health care services so that they meet  the needs of all. We emphasize the need for a community-based  mental health system. And we show the importance of providing  person-centred, human rights-based and recovery-oriented care. Key messages from this chapter are: Community-based mental health care is more  accessible and acceptable than institutional  care, helps prevent human rights violations,  and delivers better recovery outcomes for  people with mental health conditions. The vast care gap for common mental health  conditions such as depression and anxiety  means countries must diversify and scale  up care, for example through non-specialist  psychological counselling or digital self-help. Community-based mental health  care comprises a network of interconnected services that include: mental  health services integrated in general  health care; community mental health  services; and services that deliver mental  health care in non-health settings and  support access to key social services. Social and informal supports delivered  by community providers (such as peers,  community volunteers and women’s  groups) complement formal services and  are vital to ensure enabling environments  for people with mental health conditions. Integrating mental health into health  services typically involves task-sharing  with non-specialist health care  providers; or adding dedicated mental  health staff and resources to primary  and secondary health care. General hospitals and community mental  health centres or teams often provide the  cornerstone of community-based mental  health care and help blend clinical services  and support with psychosocial rehabilitation. Where feasible, supported living services are  key to deinstitutionalization; they include  a mix of facilities with varying levels of  support for different levels of dependency. Complementing health interventions with  key social services, including child protection  and access to education, employment  and social benefits, is essential to enable  people with mental health conditions to  achieve their recovery goals and live a  more satisfying and meaningful life. 188 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

At the heart of mental health reform for most  countries, lies a major reorganization of mental  health services. The task is to simultaneously  shift the locus of care for severe mental health  conditions away from any institutions and  towards communities, while scaling up the  availability of care for common conditions such  as depression and anxiety. Both strategies are  critical to advance human rights and improve  the coverage and quality of mental health care. Every district, province, prefecture, region, major  city or other sizeable administrative division  (here called “district”) should have a network  of accessible community-based mental health  services to provide an inter-connected platform for  supporting people with a broad range of mental  health conditions. This network must also be able  to help meet the broader social and economic  needs of people living with mental health  conditions, which means that the network must  be developed and delivered in close collaboration  with multiple sectors and stakeholders (423). This chapter explores what comprehensive  community-based mental health care means in  theory and what it might look like in practice.  We outline some of the principles behind the  idea, consider each of its main component  parts, and showcase examples of practice from  around the globe. Not all examples necessarily  represent the best solution for all contexts.  Rather, each country will need to consider  what is feasible and adequate depending on  their own realities, capacities and needs. 7.1 Understanding community-based  mental health care Discussions on services reform are often confused  by a lack of common language. WHO uses the  term “community-based mental health care” for  any mental health care that is provided outside  of a psychiatric hospital. This includes services  available through primary health care, specific  health programmes (for example HIV clinics),  district or regional general hospitals as well as  relevant social services. It also includes a range  of community mental health services, including  community mental health centres and teams,  psychosocial rehabilitation programmes and  small-scale residential facilities, among others. 7.1.1 Putting people first WHO has long strongly advocated  community-based mental health care as an  alternative to institutional care (1, 23). Through  the Comprehensive mental health action  plan 2013–2030, countries are committed to  doubling the number of community-based  mental health facilities by 2030. Compared with institutional care, community-  based mental health care is broadly  acknowledged to: •	 Increase accessibility. Community-based care  means people can access services closer to  home, which eliminates potentially prohibitive  costs of seeking care in distant locations and  makes services more accessible. It also allows  for treatment in a familiar environment, in  which people can maintain support networks,  relationships, friendships and employment,  educational and other activities while receiving  care, which facilitates recovery (424). 189 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

•	 Reduce stigma. Community-based care can  help shift attitudes around mental health  conditions to lessen social exclusion for  those affected and make them more likely to  seek help (425). •	 Better protect human rights. Community-  based care reduces the likelihood of seclusion,  restraint, overmedication neglect and abuse,  which are especially common in institutional  settings. Community-based care is also  important to reduce discrimination and meet  people’s rights to liberty, and participation and  inclusion in their community (23). •	 Improve outcomes. Community-based care  is more effective than institution-based care in  addressing people’s preferences, supporting  community reintegration and improving  quality of life (426). When it comes to implementing community-based  care in practice, WHO emphasizes the need for  a person-centred, recovery-based approach  that ensures all people have access to a range  of services and supports, from promotion  and prevention to treatment and rehabilitation. So care should be coordinated across  different levels and sites within and beyond  the health sector, according to people’s  needs throughout the life-course (427). A life-course approach is especially important  to target critical stages, transitions and settings  where different interventions may be particularly relevant (see section 2.1.3 Mental health is  experienced over the life-course). Mental health  services often focus on adults rather than children,  adolescents and older people even though  these are critical life stages for mental health. Person-centred care In all cases, good and supportive  community-based health care is organized  around the health needs and expectations of  people, not diseases. Such person-centred care  engages individuals, families and communities  as active participants in, rather than passive  recipients of, care. It consciously adopts  people’s own perspectives and priorities and  responds to these in humane and holistic ways  (427). Thus it seeks to understand and respect  people’s cultural understandings of mental  health, and to ensure that mental health care  providers engage in meaningful conversations  about people’s needs and concerns (428). Importantly, person-centred care encourages  a more holistic approach to identifying and  managing an individual’s overall health needs  rather than focusing on a particular pathology  or disease. This is especially valuable for  people with multiple needs or conditions. Good and supportive  community-based health  care is organized around the  health needs and expectations  of people, not diseases. In practice, person-centred care means many  things, including: •	 fully respecting people’s human rights and  personal values; •	 accounting for and respecting people’s  treatment preferences and expressed needs; •	 coordinating and integrating care across  services and sites; •	 involving individuals in planning and delivering  their care; •	 making sure people are physically comfortable  and safe; and •	 providing intervention and support as and  where needed. For children and adolescents, person-centred  care is typically family-oriented, engaging  caregivers in decisions and care as required  while respecting older adolescents’ evolving  autonomy. Across all ages, implementing  person-centred care relies on people having  190 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

the information and support they need to make  decisions and participate in their own care (427). Person-centred care can have lasting benefits for  individuals, communities, health workers and even  whole health systems (429). It can enhance the  trust, experience and outcomes people have from  care (read Claudia’s experience). Person-centred  care can also improve access to care and  strengthen the health literacy and decision-making  skills that promote independence. It can  increase confidence and job satisfaction for  health professionals. And it can improve the  quality and efficiency of health systems. NARRATIVE Access to good quality care put me  on my road to recovery Claudia’s experience In my experience, good quality mental health care  is about reciprocal understanding: uncovering  the underlying problems and finding solutions by  focusing on the individual’s unique needs. My journey in a snapshot is: two voluntary admissions,  a clear multi-disciplinary approach to treatment,  inpatient  and outpatient treatment and continuous  therapy. Both hospitalizations were frightening. The  first time I was afraid of having knowingly decided to  undergo treatment that I did not know much about.  The second time I was more versed in mental health  but I was still unsure of what to expect. White walls,  long queues, constant monitoring, strict visiting hours:  it was all new and intimidating. During my second hospitalization, I had daily sessions  with trained practitioners as well as group work that  taught me about my diagnosis, what it means to live  with a mental health condition and what I could do  to help myself get better. There were other optional  classes on meditation, breathing exercises, and arts  and craft therapy. It was this mental health care that  secured me on my road to recovery. After my discharge I wanted to help people in the  same way my health care practitioners and their  person-centred treatment had helped me. I pursued  a career in psychology and today I am a certified  wellness counsellor and deputy chief executive  officer at an international mental health lived  experience organization. Living with a mental health condition does not make  you less of a person, nor does it need to take away  your ability to function optimally. With the right  health care systems in place, I believe that many  more people like me can be helped worldwide. With  the right skills and tools we can all thrive in life and  reach our full potential. Claudia Sartor, South Africa 191 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

Recovery-oriented care Recovery is widely accepted as an important  aspect of person-centred care in community-based  mental health services, including in those  designed for people living with severe mental  health conditions such as schizophrenia (430). The term recovery used to be largely defined in  clinical terms to mean a remission of symptoms  alongside improved cognitive, social and  occupational functioning. But people with lived  experience have long challenged the assumption  that having a mental health condition means  you cannot live a productive and satisfying  life, arguing that recovery can occur even as  symptoms persist. In this context, the idea of  personal recovery emerged to mean a way of  living a satisfying, hopeful and contributing  life despite the limitations that experiencing  mental health problems can impose (431). From a human rights perspective, recovery  focuses on the right to participate in all facets of  life on an equal basis with all other people (432). Recovery-oriented care is not  about treatment of symptoms  but about empowering people to  have control of their own lives. In practice, recovery-oriented care includes  elements of both personal and social recovery.  It can mean different things to different people.  Importantly recovery-oriented care is not about  treatment of symptoms but about empowering  people to have control of their own lives (430).  It involves supporting people to find hope,  develop self-esteem and resilience, build healthy  relationships, regain independence and to  live a life that has meaning for them, whether  that be through school, vocational training,  work, friendships, community engagement,  spirituality, or something else (23). Effective recovery-oriented care is often  characterized by: •	 Recovery planning. Individuals are guided to  articulate what their expectations and goals  are and to describe how they want to live their  life, for example by writing a recovery plan,  taking into account all aspects of their lives,  such as relationships, work, and education  (321). For adolescents, recovery planning  includes recognizing and respecting their  evolving capacities in making recovery plans  for themselves (432). •	 Supported self-management. Individuals are  supported to build the skills and confidence  they need to recognize and manage the  physical, social and emotional impacts  of a mental health condition. Supported  self-management includes, for example,  psychoeducation about the condition and  its treatment, recognizing early warning  signs of relapse and developing a relapse  prevention plan; and strengthening coping  skills for dealing with persistent symptoms  (433). Evidence suggests that supported  self-management can improve outcomes for  people with severe mental health conditions  (434). It is also relatively straightforward  compared with other therapeutic interventions  and can be delivered across settings and in  various ways. •	 Multisectoral coordination. Services are  coordinated between health, social and other  care sectors including child protection. The aim  is to simultaneously address the multiple needs  of people with mental health conditions. Human rights-based care The CRPD requires that governments provide  people with disabilities access to quality mental  health services that respect their rights and dignity.  This means that mental health services should  not only be affordable, available, person-centred,  recovery-oriented and evidence-based, among  other attributes, but also that they should promote  192 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

autonomy, legal capacity (equal recognition  before the law), non-coercion, confidentiality,  participation, and community inclusion. Respecting people’s autonomy can be challenging  but good practice case examples show that is it  possible (see section 4.2.3. Autonomy in health  decision-making) (23). For example, services are  increasingly introducing advance plans or directives  that enable people to indicate what they want  to happen in case of a crisis (203). Advance plans  can cover many topics, including when and how  to activate them, who to contact for supported  decision-making, and what treatment is acceptable  or not acceptable, among other things (205). Similarly, services should and can make much  progress on care that fully involves the person in  their care plan. People subjected to care without  their agreement report feeling dehumanized  and long-term effects on their mental well-being  (read Sandra ’s experience and Alexandra’s  experience in Chapter 4). Coercive practices  undermine people’s confidence and trust in  mental health service staff, leading people to  avoid mental health care (23). All services can  and should promote non-coercive practices (see  Box 7.1 Promoting non-coercive practices). Throughout this chapter, we use case studies  from around the world to illustrate what  community-based care looks like in practice and  how it can be achieved through mental health  care reform. Not all the examples presented here  fully live up to all aspects of person-centred,  recovery-oriented, human rights-based care in their  entirety, but all of them represent advances in care. TOOL BOX 7.1 Promoting non-coercive practices In addition to changing laws and policies, WHO  identifies several actions as key to advancing  non-coercive practices. 1.	 Educate service staff about power differentials,  hierarchies and how these can lead to intimidation,  fear and loss of trust. 2.	 Help staff to understand what are considered  coercive practices and the consequences of using them. 3.	 Provide systematic training for all staff on  non-coercive responses to crisis situations, including  de-escalation strategies and good communication. 4.	 Support individualized planning, including crisis  plans and advance directives. 5.	 Modify physical and social environments to  create a welcoming atmosphere, including by  using comfort rooms and response teams to avoid  or address and overcome conflict or otherwise  challenging situations. 6.	 Establish effective grievance mechanisms  for receiving, responding to and learning from  complaints, including having a technical debriefing  after any use of coercion. 7.	 Reflect on, and where appropriate change,  the role of all stakeholders in coercion, including  the justice system, the police, general health care  workers and the community at large. Sources: WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]; WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 193 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

7.1.2 A mix of services  and supports People’s needs for mental health care vary  enormously. Some people may be able to manage  their mental health conditions themselves,  especially with support from community  providers such as family members, peer support  groups, faith-based organizations, or community  workers (318). Many others will need formal  interventions to support their recovery, which  are typically offered through a range of daytime  services. Some people will experience acute  symptoms that require short-term overnight  care with follow-up care in the community.  Only rarely do people experience conditions  that require highly specialized or longer-term  round-the-clock care, which should be in  the community, for example within general  hospitals or in community residential facilities.  Children, adolescents, adults or older adults  may need different or adapted services. Many people experiencing mental health  conditions also require help accessing key social  services such as housing, employment, education  and welfare. And anyone with mental health  conditions may need different types of services  and supports at different points in their lives (436). All countries will need to organize  access to specialized care at the  district level or equivalent. Effective community-based mental health  care includes a careful mix of services and  supports that can cater to all these needs (437).  It also ensures continuity of care between  different services and supports, especially  for those people who have complex needs  or require ongoing care, as is common in  schizophrenia. For each person, the aim is to  avoid breaks or gaps in the support provided. In practice, a community-based mental  health system can broadly be described as  a network of interconnected services that  typically includes a mix of (see Fig. 7.1): •	 Mental health services that are integrated in  general health care, at primary care facilities  and general hospitals, including within existing  specific health programmes (for example for HIV). •	 Community mental health services that focus  on meeting the needs of people living with  mental health conditions and of their families,  and that potentially include community mental  health centres or teams, as well as peer support  services, psychosocial rehabilitation programmes  and, where feasible, supported living through  small-scale residential facilities. These services  are still very rare in low-income countries. •	 Services beyond the health sector that deliver  mental health care in non-health settings such  as schools, workplaces and prisons; and that  support access to key social services such  as housing, education, employment, social  benefits and livelihood support. Fig. 7.1 shows a vision of a comprehensive  network of interconnected formal services.  This cannot be achieved without sufficient  resources, and low-income countries are unlikely  to be in a position to have such comprehensive network of services in the near future. In  general, most countries need to decide which  services to develop or strengthen first. So  how service networks for mental health are  developed and organized in practice will vary.  Almost all countries rightly give primary health  care a key role in supporting people with mental  health conditions. Yet all countries – including  low-income ones – will also need to organize  access to some form of specialized mental  health care at the district level or equivalent. 194 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

FIG. 7.1 Model network of community-based mental health services  Some countries offer specialized care by  developing community mental health centres or  teams, or by adding community mental health  nurses to primary health care. Many others  offer these services within district-level general  hospitals. And higher-resourced countries tend to  combine multiple types of specialized services. As  described in Chapter 5 Foundations for change,  when lower-resourced countries do not have  sufficient specialists to provide these services at  the district level, they should consider strategies  to address this gap. This may be, for example,  MENTAL HEALTH  BEYOND THE  HEALTH SECTOR MENTAL HEALTH  IN GENERAL  HEALTH CARE COMMUNITY  MENTAL HEALTH  CENTRES AND  TEAMS PSYCHOSOCIAL  REHABILITATION PEER  SUPPORT  SERVICES SUPPORTED  LIVING  SERVICES SOCIAL  SERVICES NON-HEALTH  SETTINGS PRIMARY  HEALTH CARE SPECIFIC  HEALTH  PROGRAMMES GENERAL HOSPITALS Liaison  care Acute  inpatient  care Outpatient  care NCD  services Maternal  and child  health clinic Medical care HIV/AIDS and TB  services Community  health work Workplace  health  services Prison health  services School health  services Social  benefits Employment Social housing Short-stay  accommodation Long-stay  accommodation Adult  learning Vocational  assistance Day care Clinical care  and support Crisis  services Outreach  services Child  protection Psychological  counselling NTD  services COMMUNITY  MENTAL HEALTH  SERVICES 195 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

by introducing and training up new cadres  of professionals who can, for the time being,  substitute for psychiatrists, clinical psychologists  or psychiatric nurses (see Box 5.11 Innovations in  human resources to develop specialist expertise). Overall, there is no single model for organizing  community-based mental health services that will  apply to all country contexts. Yet every country,  no matter its resource constraints, can take  steps to restructure and scale up mental health  care. Differences in health system structures,  human resources and the legacies of pre-existing  mental health services will influence the exact  configuration of service networks; and local  differences in geography, means of accessing  services, literacy and social and informal  support systems need to be considered. Beyond formal services Beyond the formal services described in Fig. 7.1,  community support systems in particular are  an important consideration in developing  community-based mental health care networks.  These systems include the psychosocial supports  delivered by a diverse range of community  providers, including family members, friends,  peers, community and faith-based leaders,  community volunteers, teachers, hairdressers,  women’s groups, youth clubs and traditional  and complementary practitioners. Social and informal supports complement  formal services and are vital to ensuring  supportive environments for people with mental  health conditions (read Eleni’s experience).  According to a 2020 global survey, talking  to natural carers (i.e. friends and family) is  the most common approach people take  to alleviate depression or anxiety (150). As shown elsewhere in this report, people with  lived experience can have a big role in supporting  others experiencing mental health conditions,  advocating for their rights and perspectives,  promoting their social inclusion, and delivering  services (see Chapter 4, In focus: Engaging and  empowering people with lived experience and  section 7.3.2 Peer support services) (438). In most countries, faith-based leaders and  traditional and complementary practitioners  are widely consulted. Their beliefs and practices  vary widely across settings, as does their effectiveness (439). Traditional healers sometimes  apply highly harmful practices (440). But they are  often the first point of contact for people with  mental health conditions, who see their input  as meaningful and likely to be helpful (441). And  there are likely many occasions where fruitful  collaboration between health services and local  healers is possible. Indeed, a large randomized  controlled trial in Ghana and Nigeria showed the  effectiveness and cost–effectiveness of a shared  care model for psychosis delivered by local  healers and primary health care providers (442). In parallel to developing a network of formal  services, all countries should establish an  enabling environment for community providers.  To that end, governments should make resources  (for example, funds and spaces) available to  community-based initiatives that can activate  and strengthen helpful community supports  for people with mental health conditions. Planning at the national and local level Comprehensive and cohesive service networks  need careful planning and management at  multiple levels (443). National mental health  authorities, directorates or departments – which  oversee and coordinate country-wide policies  and legislation – have a crucial role (444). These  authorities advise the central government and  can help prioritize mental health matters at  the national level. They also develop quality  and service provision norms and compile  national data on all mental health services.  196 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

NARRATIVE My family are my community  care workers Eleni’s experience I live with bipolar disorder in Ethiopia, where until  recently no treatment options beyond medication  were available. A decade ago, mental health care  was given by a few psychiatrists who had to ration  their services across a long queue of people. Other  therapies were non-existent; they were not even  acknowledged by the country’s health system. For me, my family members are my community care  workers. I have the privilege of having parents with  a medical background, and a sister and husband  who are social workers. Their belief in me has been  a major support in my recovery journey. Investing in  my mental health care has never been considered  a wasted effort or resource in my family. Their  empathy, emotional and financial support helped me  overcome my own limitations and self-stigma. During the times when there were no counselling  services for mental health in town, my family filled  the gap graciously; they continue to do so today. I  would never have got this far on my recovery journey  if my family had not supported me along the road. Eleni Misganaw, Ethiopia They conduct monitoring and evaluation and  can facilitate exchanges of good practices  across regions. They keep up to date with  international developments in mental health  and engage in international forums, bringing  lessons learned back to the country. A mental  health authority can be held accountable for  achieving (or not achieving) mental health  improvements and development in the country. Local mental health authorities plan services for  a particular geographical area such as a district,  taking into consideration local differences in  context and availability of human and other  resources. Local planning makes it easier to  involve local stakeholders, including people  with lived experience. And it allows service  users to hold local planners to account (445). Whether national or local, mental health service  planning and implementation must identify and  budget for an appropriate range of mental health  services, based on assessed needs, priorities  and available resources in the population,  including trained personnel (see Fig. 7.2). 197 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

FIG. 7.2 Steps in planning and budgeting mental health services  Source: adapted from WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]. Integrated and dedicated mental  health services Service networks for mental health will always  include some services that combine physical  and mental health care at the point of delivery  (integrated services), and some services that are  unique to mental health (dedicated services). Integrated services include mental health  interventions that are provided as part of  general health care, mainly at primary care and  general hospital facilities. Integration ensures  that wherever physical health services are  provided, mental health care is also available. Dedicated services encompass any service  specifically designed to support mental health.  They include, for example, psychiatric inpatient and  outpatient units in general hospitals, community  mental health centres or teams, mental health  outreach services, day care centres, mental  health crisis services and many other services at  the secondary care level of the health system. Dedicated services are often described as  referral or specialized care in UHC packages  (446). But, in reality, they can be broader than  that because some dedicated services (such  as crisis mental health services) should be  NEED ASSESSMENT SITUATION ANALYSIS TARGET SETTING IMPLEMENTATION [PHONE_REDACTED]Identify population to be served Review context of mental health care Consult stakeholders Identify responsibilities for plan and budget Review service resources across sectors Review service use across sectors Set priorities based on need Appraise options Set medium-term targets (3-5 years) for: new service functions and facilities,  extended capacity of existing services,  disinvestment from lower priorities, and collection of data for next planning cycle Manage budgets Monitor  Evaluate Calculate annual expected cases Estimate resources required Cost resources for estimated need 198 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

accessible without referral. And others (such as  lay psychological counselling) may be provided  by community workers who have been trained  and supervised but who cannot be considered  specialists as they lack advanced training. In all cases, when planning mental health care  and developing UHC packages, the overall  question should never be whether services  should be integrated or dedicated but rather  how to provide both. Investing to integrate  mental health into primary care is unlikely to be  sustainable unless there are dedicated mental  health services that can support, mentor and  supervise primary care staff and accept referrals  for complex cases. Conversely, investments  in dedicated mental health services alone are  unlikely to enable or improve care for the vast  majority of people who need it because of the  high prevalence of mental health conditions. Multisectoral responsibilities The responsibility for delivering community-based  mental health care, whether through integrated  or dedicated services, straddles multiple sectors. The ministry or department of health is  responsible for providing mental health  services in general health care and for most  community mental health services. But other  responsibilities are not so clearly defined. For example, in countries that offer supported  living services and economic support to people  living with severe mental health conditions,  these services and supports may, or may not  be, included in the health ministry’s remit.  Similarly, providing mental health services within  schools may fall to either the health or education  ministry. And many other community-based  mental health and psychosocial services – such  as those specifically for victims of gender-based  violence, homeless people and children in care –  are usually run by the ministry of social welfare.  Moreover, in several countries, other ministries  are responsible for large, long-term institutions  that are de facto asylums for people with mental  health conditions, substance use disorders and  cognitive, intellectual and psychosocial disabilities. Deciding which sector takes responsibility for  which service is important. But what matters even  more is ensuring that a full spectrum of accessible,  affordable and quality community-based services  exists, that there is strong multisectoral collaboration and coordination mechanisms in place  to achieve that, and that long-term institutional  care is strategically phased out across sectors. Including relevant stakeholders is also important.  In many countries, local nongovernmental  organization are major providers of  community-based mental health and social  services. These services can be commissioned by  the government or established independently.  Independent services led by nongovernmental  organizations often find it easier to adapt to  changing needs and to innovate than government  services. But, like government services,  they still require regulatory oversight. 7.1.3 Deinstitutionalizing  mental health care In most countries, developing effective service  networks for mental health relies on successfully  deinstitutionalizing mental health care away from  custodial care in psychiatric hospitals or asylums  towards care in the community – for all ages. Deinstitutionalization is equally relevant to traditional  institutions such as prayer camps (440). And it also  applies to any other custodial care institution run by  charity or government that operates as an asylum  for people with severe mental health conditions. Deinstitutionalization is a technically and  organizationally challenging and complex  process that is often gradual and rarely linear.  199 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

It is more than just a process that needs to be  well-managed. It requires transforming the  lives and mindsets of all involved. Responsible  deinstitutionalization puts into operation a  shared vision to humanize mental health care,  based on understanding the importance of  community, liberty and autonomy to all people. Deinstitutionalization is not  the same as discharging  people from institutions. Progressively reducing caseloads to close or  repurpose long-stay psychiatric institutions is  important. Deinstitutionalization is not the same  as discharging people from institutions as it must  be accompanied by sufficient financial, structural  and strategic investment in community-based  services. This is essential to meet the health and  social needs of former institutional residents,  and their families or carers, and also to prevent  new- or re-admissions (see Fig. 7.3). As community  services are developed, it is important to close  institutional beds to prevent another generation  of long-stay residents being admitted. Indeed,  long-stay psychiatric institutions should be closed  once there are adequate community alternatives. FIG. 7.3 Deinstitutionalization involves simultaneously increasing discharges, reducing  admissions, and scaling up care in the community  Source:  WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]. Systematically reduce new psychiatric hospital admissions; and enhance the quality of care and rights of people in all inpatient or residential care. REDUCE ADMISSIONS Progressively discharge residents of psychiatric hospitals as community-based solutions to meet their health and social needs become available. INCREASE DISCHARGES Build up a network of coordinated and linked community-based mental health services and social care to support anyone living with a mental health condition. SCALE UP SERVICES 200 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

Lessons learned from experience  Deinstitutionalizing mental health care and  building community services is a simultaneous  process that gradually redirects resources from  the institution towards the community. Experience  shows that moving people out of custodial  psychiatric care can go very well – or very badly  (447, 448). Both outcomes offer lessons, and  together reveal 10 ingredients for future success. 1.	 Support at the highest and broadest levels.  Support is key, not only from political leaders and  government officials, but also from community  leaders and members, and academia. 2.	 Careful planning and implementation.  Moving long-stay residents from institutional  to community-based care requires thorough  planning and preparation, as well as phased  implementation, including shortening stays  and preventing new admissions. Transforming  institutions should start with changing life  within institutions, for example by changing  activities, routines and internal dynamics  between staff and residents, and by addressing  coercion and abuse. 3.	 Engagement and empowerment of  residents. Residents must be able to actively  participate in the process of change. This  means being fully involved in discussions  about discharge options and re-introducing  skills of daily living. It also means being  supported to realize one’s rights as citizens,  for example to manage one’s own resources,  make informed decisions on where to live, and  choose what clothes to wear, and getting paid  for any work in the institution. 4.	 Community-based services. To avoid  neglect and homelessness, appropriate  community-based services and supports,  in line with any resident’s individual needs,  must be available on discharge. Usually,  some residents (or groups of residents from  defined geographical areas) will be able to  leave the institution before others, depending  on their needs and how well-developed the  community-based services are in the area  where the individual will live. 5.	 Temporary additional financial resources. To  deinstitutionalize, both psychiatric hospitals  and community mental health services must  have parallel funding during the transition  period so that institutions can continue to  operate while community-based services are  being developed. 6.	 A committed health workforce. Health  workers and their professional organizations  need to be consulted widely, and involved in  planning and implementing the process, so  that they are committed rather than resistant to  change. Typically, when long-stay institutions  are scaled down, hospital staff need to be  trained to provide care in the community. 7.	 Stigma reduction. Anti-stigma interventions  involving leaders, health workers, and  the public should form part of any  deinstitutionalization programme so as to  reduce the chance of mistreatment once  people live in the community. 8.	 Consent from residents and involvement  from families. Obtaining consent from  residents that are to be discharged and, where  possible, involving families and loved ones  throughout the process is critical. 9.	 Attention to both mental health and physical  health. Following up not only on discharged  residents’ mental health but also on their  physical health is crucial to prevent people  dying prematurely in the community. 10.	Monitoring and evaluation. Norms and  standards for community care, treatment and  rehabilitation must be established. Regular  inspections and evaluations must be carried  out to ensure that quality care and support is  provided to each and every individual who is  discharged from the institution. 201 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

CASE STUDY Timing is key for successful deinstitutionalization  (see section 5.2.1 Strengthening political will and  engagement: windows of opportunity). Once in  place, community-based models of care are not  necessarily less or more expensive than institutions, especially after accounting for people’s  needs and quality of care. In fact, they may be  more cost–effective when they deliver better  recovery outcomes (449). In any case, the reason for moving people  out of institutions should not just be that  it could be cost–effective but that the  individuals concerned can live better and more  meaningful lives. Experience shows that done  well, deinstitutionalization can improve the  quality of life for people living with mental  health conditions and protect them from a  wide range of human rights violations. For the most part, bed reduction in parallel  with substantial investment in community  services has successfully transitioned people  into comprehensive, community-based care and  reintegrated them into communities, preventing  long-term institutionalization, homelessness and  imprisonment (read Regina’s experience in Chapter  [PHONE_REDACTED], 450). Reform can be implemented on a  small scale, within individual towns or districts,  or on a large scale, across whole countries (see  Box 7.2 Deinstitutionalizing mental health care in  Brazil). In various instances, community placement  surveys with long-stay residents have helped plan  for their resettlement and continuing care (451). BOX 7.2 Deinstitutionalizing mental health care in Brazil In the early 1990s, 75% of Brazil’s federal funding for  mental health went to custodial hospitals operating  under poor conditions, with serious human rights  violations. In the three decades since, there has  been a gradual shift of resources towards care in the  community, with people progressively discharged  from institutional care. Today, more than 79% of  federal funding is invested in a community-based  system of care that aims to provide a human rights  and recovery-oriented approach. The new system integrates primary care, general  hospitals and crisis care within psychosocial care  networks that are coordinated by community mental  health centres (CAPS). These operate 24 hours a day,  seven days a week. The system includes residential  facilities as well as a rehabilitation allowance for  people returning home after a long-stay in hospital.  It also provides technical and financial support for  local initiatives aimed at social rehabilitation, income  generation and advocacy. From 1998 to 2020, the number of CAPS grew from  148 to 2 657, distributed across the country. They  now provide the cornerstone of mental health care  in Brazil, used by more than half the population  diagnosed with a mental health condition. Studies  show that CAPS are effective in supporting  individuals’ autonomy and recovery, reporting high  levels of satisfaction by people with lived experience  and their families. Sources: Lociks de Araújo, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Ministério da Saúde, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 202 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

In a few cases, where hospital beds have been  reduced without investment in community-based  alternatives, the quality and quantity of care  has suffered badly, leading to highly adverse  outcomes for the people concerned. For example,  in 2017 at least 144 people died, including from  starvation and neglect, after they were discharged  from hospitals to underfunded and underskilled  community care as part of a rushed and poorly  planned programme to deinstitutionalize mental  health care in Gauteng, South Africa (448). Lessons from Gauteng emphasize the  need for comprehensive anti-stigma and  anti-discrimination interventions. They recall the  need for broad consultation across stakeholders  and full consent from service users and families.  They underline the importance of a planned and  phased approach, with carefully established norms  and standards for community care, which should  be regularly monitored by health authorities. Where deinstitutionalization has been done  responsibly, experience shows that it can also  be highly sustainable, enduring over decades. In  1978, Italy started implementing Law Number  180, a law that stopped all new admissions to  public psychiatric hospitals. After 40 years without  psychiatric hospitals, the Italian mental health  system is comparable with other G7 countries,  which are all high-income economies (454).  Yet Italy has far fewer mental health staff per  [PHONE_REDACTED]population. In 2019, Italy had no beds  in psychiatric hospitals, while in the other G7  countries the number of psychiatric hospital  beds ranged from 11 per [PHONE_REDACTED]population in  Canada to 170 per [PHONE_REDACTED]in Japan (5). In Italy  there are also fewer beds for acute care in general  hospitals but more beds in community residential  facilities than in the other G7 countries. And  in Italy the number of compulsory admissions  declined from more than [PHONE_REDACTED]in 1978 to less  than 9 000 in 2015 (see Box 7.3 Trieste, Italy: 40  years of community-based mental health care).   203 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

CASE STUDY BOX 7.3 Trieste, Italy: 40 years of community-based mental health care In Trieste, Italy, community-based mental  health care has proven effective for more than  40 years. The Trieste transformation began in  the 1970s, with the relocation of people living  in the city’s asylum to the community. Funds  previously used to run the asylum were gradually  diverted to develop a comprehensive network  of community-based services. Community  mental health centres are open 24 hours a day  and provide walk-in clinics, home treatment,  day care, psychosocial support, medication  and overnight crisis care, among other services.  There are also rehabilitation and residential  services that provide different levels of supported  housing and have links with local networks of  social cooperatives that offer job opportunities  and run cultural and educational activities. As much as possible, people are supported in their  own homes and neighbourhoods, so that they can  continue to live their lives in their communities. Importantly, in Trieste people are active participants in  their care. They help develop personalized care plans,  which look beyond clinical interventions to consider a  wide range of social care needs, from housing support  and personal hygiene to finances and work. The Trieste model of deinstitutionalization has  improved user satisfaction, social functioning and  health outcomes for people living with mental health  conditions. Suicide rates in the city have fallen. So  have involuntary admissions. And stigma around  mental health has been reduced as people living with  mental health conditions have reintegrated into the  community. The new model of care is also cheaper,  delivered at 37% of the cost of the old asylum in Trieste. Sources: Barbui et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Mezzina, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Mezzina, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Dipartimento di Salute Mentale, [PHONE_REDACTED]. Deinstitutionalization is ongoing in a number of  countries. In Argentina, mental health reform is  happening in several provinces. In the province  of Buenos Aires, between January 2020 and June  2021 the number of people in institutions fell from  1 810 to 1 391. This was achieved by stopping  long-term admissions, giving 381 people a transfer  subsidy to support discharge, and providing  housing support for 306 discharged residents.  Discharged residents are supported by existing  community-based mental health services (458). 7.1.4 Scaling up care for  people with common  conditions The high prevalence and vast care gap for  common mental health conditions such as  depression and anxiety mean that countries  need to diversify and scale up options for care for  these conditions if they are to move towards, or  reach, universal health coverage. New funding  and effort will be needed to add evidence-based  204 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

psychological care to existing health and  mental health services as well as to social care  settings, the criminal justice system, schools  and universities, and online environments. Sections 7.2–7.4 detail some of the strategies  required to make this happen in different services.  For example, although any community mental  health service will likely cater for common as well  as severe mental health conditions, this will not  be enough. Delivery of psychological care needs  to be expanded in primary health care settings  and through community providers. Other key  strategies for scaling up evidence-based care  for common mental health conditions include  enabling self-help and making better use of  digital technologies (see Chapter 5, In focus:  Harnessing digital technologies for mental health). Non-specialist counselling Psychological counselling programmes that  recruit, train and deploy non-specialist counsellors  to deliver group or individual evidence-based  psychological interventions have proven to be  highly effective for people with depression and  anxiety (314). This form of counselling should not  be confused with giving information or advice (as  when someone counsels a new mother on how  to care for her baby). Psychological counselling  programmes can be implemented at scale  (see Box 7.4 Lay mental health care workers  treat depression in Uganda and Zambia). Non-specialist counsellors for depression and  anxiety can include a wide range of people. They  range from community workers, volunteers and  peers with as little as ten years of education to  people with a university degree but without  specialist mental health training (for example  nurses or first-degree psychology graduates). 205 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

CASE STUDY BOX 7.4 Lay mental health care workers treat depression in Uganda and Zambia  In Uganda and Zambia, the social enterprise  StrongMinds trains lay workers and volunteers in a  culturally adapted and locally validated format of  interpersonal therapy, and deploys them to treat  depression in women and adolescents. The lay therapists help group participants identify  their depression triggers (prolonged bereavement,  disputes, loneliness or social isolation and changes  in one’s life) and design strategies to overcome these.  Groups, typically of 12 participants, meet in their  local communities for eight or more sessions. Since  depression can recur, the skills acquired through  therapy have both an immediate and long-term  preventive impact. The organization identifies clients through a  mobilization process that includes psychoeducation  and outreach in partnership with community  leaders, schools, partner nongovernmental  organizations, and government counterparts. The  organization also runs public education campaigns  via radio and social media. Over the past eight years, the programme has  treated more than [PHONE_REDACTED]people. As assessed by  the PHQ-9 depression screening tool, more than  80% of individuals treated recover, and the results  are sustained six months after treatment. People  who have completed therapy report a 16% increase  in work attendance, a 28% increase in being socially  connected, a 13% increase in families eating regular  meals, and a 30% increase in school attendance  among their children. StrongMinds is now scaling up by partnering with  governments and nongovernmental organizations,  to integrate its mental health intervention into  existing livelihood, food security, health, and  education programmes. Sources: StrongMinds, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Bolton et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 206 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

In all cases, training and ongoing supportive  supervision are important to build non-specialist  providers’ confidence and to monitor competencies  (see section 5.4.3 Equipping community providers  with mental health care competencies). Non-specialist psychological counselling can also  add substantial value to specialized psychiatric  care. For example, in a tertiary mental health  care facility in Islamabad, Pakistan, a brief  psychological intervention called Problem  Management Plus (PM+) was added to routine,  mainly pharmacological, care. PM+ and similar  interventions are usually implemented outside  specialist settings. In Islamabad, the intervention  was delivered within the specialist care setting but  by non-specialist counsellors, who had completed  an undergraduate degree in psychology without  any clinical training. Adding the psychological  intervention was found to substantially improve  outcomes for people with depression and anxiety  (461). If more specialized care facilities included  such evidence-based non-specialist counselling in  their routine care, then they would be well placed to  guide and support the roll out of such counselling  to primary care and community settings. Indeed, non-specialist counselling programmes  can, and increasingly are, implemented within  primary care facilities and other community-based  settings, including through stand-alone services  run by nongovernmental organizations.  Studies show that these programmes can boost  the capacity of frontline mental health services  and greatly improve care. For example, one  programme in the North West Province of South  Africa saw primary care nurses identify people  with depression among patients with chronic  disease in a collaborative care programme. They  referred those with mild to moderate depressive  symptoms to lay counsellors for structured  counselling based on cognitive-behaviour  therapy. The study found clinically significant  reductions in symptoms at 12 months follow up.  People reported feeling more empowered and  better equipped to deal with social issues (462). Non-specialist counselling can  boost the capacity of frontline  mental health services and  greatly improve care. In rural Maharashtra, India, the Atmiyata approach  uses trained community volunteers to identify,  support and counsel community members  with common mental health conditions. These  volunteers offer problem solving and behavioural  activation techniques. They also facilitate access to  mental health care and social (financial) benefits,  improve community awareness of mental health  issues and promote well-being. Atmiyata offers a  service that complements the formal health sector.  Its approach has promise in improving the acceptability of care as well as reducing disability and  improving quality of life and social participation  for people with depression and anxiety (463, 464). Non-specialist psychological counselling  programmes can also be used to reach specific  groups of people that may be particularly  vulnerable to depression or anxiety, including new  parents, refugees or people living with HIV/AIDS  (see Box 7.5 Friendship benches for mental health).  A recent promising innovation is to use a single  intervention approach for common problems  that cross a range of mental health conditions  (transdiagnostic therapy) (465, 466). This approach  has been successfully tested with survivors of  violence in countries as diverse as Colombia,  Ethiopia, Iraq, Thailand, Ukraine and Zambia. 207 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

CASE STUDY BOX 7.5 Friendship benches for mental health In Zimbabwe, the Friendship Bench project has  been integrating mental health into other health  programmes for more than 20 years. The project uses  problem-solving therapies delivered by community  volunteers, known as “grandmothers”, to address  “kufungisisa” (which means thinking too much and is  a local concept in the Shona language that denotes a  range of non-psychotic mental health conditions). Friendship grandmothers are trained to counsel  people for structured 45-minute sessions on  wooden benches within the grounds of primary care  clinics, where people access services for various  medical conditions, including HIV/AIDS, TB, NCDs  and NTDs. People are referred to the benches by  medical care providers and, after the first session,  are invited back by the grandmothers for up to five  more sessions. They may also receive home visits,  join group therapy or be referred to a specialist,  depending on their needs. The Friendship Bench approach has been shown  to significantly reduce symptoms of depression  and anxiety compared with the usual standard of  care. It is also thought to lead to improvements in  co-occurring health conditions, including adherence  to antiretroviral therapy for HIV. Since 2006, more than 600 grandmothers have been  trained through the Friendship Bench. They have  delivered free therapy to tens of thousands of people  in more than 70 communities in Zimbabwe; and can  now also be found in a range of other countries. The model has also been adapted to be more  relevant for adolescents, few of whom engaged in the  original project, either because they were not using  the primary health care clinics where the benches  were or because they were embarrassed about being  seen seeking help from a grandmother. The Youth  Friendship Bench is designed for 16–19 year-olds and  uses psychology and sociology student “buddies”  to provide problem-solving therapy instead of  grandmothers. Counsellor training is the same but  with added focus on topics such as drug use, sex and  relationships. Buddies reported managing to create  alliances with their clients and say they see their  work as meaningful and urgent; but more studies are  needed to investigate client experiences. Sources: Chibanda et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Wallén et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 208 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

BOX 7.6 Improving Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT) Improving Access to Psychological Therapies  (IAPT) is a national programme of evidence-based  psychological treatments for anxiety and depression  in the United Kingdom. Launched in 2008 as  a service for adults, the programme has since  expanded to include a children and young people’s  sub-component, including in schools. Receiving  around 1.25 million referrals each year, it is by  far the largest publicly funded and systematic  implementation of evidence-based psychological  treatment in the world. The programme has served as  a model for developing similar services in Australia,  Canada, Japan and Norway. IAPT adopts a stepped care approach that offers  progressively intensive treatments, according to  need. People are initially offered low-intensity,  guided self-help based on principles of CBT. The  self-help is psychoeducational in nature and is  delivered over the phone, via computerized CBT,  in large groups or individually. It is delivered  by supervised non-specialized helpers called  Psychological Well-being Practitioners who provide  standardized, evidence-based interventions.  Practitioners are guided by associated assessment  and treatment competency measures. People who do not improve after guided self-help are  stepped up to receive high-intensity psychological  therapies from qualified therapists. A review of 60 studies found large improvements  in depression and anxiety among people attending  IAPT services. Source: Wakefield et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. CASE STUDY Self-help As mentioned in Chapter 5 Foundations for  change, self-help can be guided (when a  worker helps the person to use materials)  or unguided (when the person receives no  support or encouragement). Both specialists  and non-specialists can have a role in guided  self-help interventions for depression and anxiety.  For example, they can facilitate discussions,  demonstrate techniques and support people  to work through self-help materials; and  they can do this face-to-face or remotely. Self-help interventions help equip people with  the tools and tactics they need to discuss and  manage any mental health problems as they arise  (read Nour’s experience in Chapter 5). They can  be delivered rapidly to large numbers of people,  making them particularly useful for scale-up  (see Box 7.6 Improving Access to Psychological  Therapies (IAPT)), including in countries  affected by crisis (see Box 7.7 Step-by-Step:  guided self-help for depression in Lebanon). 209 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

BOX 7.7 Step-by-Step: guided self-help for depression in Lebanon Step-by-Step is a new WHO digital self-help  intervention. It provides psychoeducation through  a narrated story and uses interactive exercises to  teach people to use therapeutic techniques to reduce  their depression. It focuses on behavioural activation  combined with stress management (slow breathing),  increasing social support and relapse prevention. When Lebanon faced a series of crises in 2020, the  Ministry of Public Health and partners tested a  culturally adapted version of Step-by-Step called  “Khoutweh-Khoutweh” with Lebanese citizens and  displaced Syrians. A guided self-help format was  used. Supervised non-specialist counsellors provided  no more than 15 minutes of remote guidance (by  phone or through online messaging) each week to  people with symptoms of depression. People who  completed the programme said it was relevant,  acceptable and beneficial (read Nour’s experience in  Chapter 5). Two large randomized controlled trials suggest that  the intervention was effective in reducing symptoms  of depression and improving functioning and  well-being countrywide. The intervention is now  offered by government as a routine service. Source: Cuijpers et al, in press (472). CASE STUDY Even unguided self-help books and materials  can be useful in scaling up psychological support  for common mental health conditions. Research  shows that using self-help books can help reduce  depressive symptoms in adults, including in the  long term (470). Nonetheless, unguided interventions tend to be less effective than guided ones  (471). Computer therapy that delivers CBT for  depression and anxiety through the Internet has  also been shown to be effective, acceptable and  practical for those with good digital access. Guided  computer therapy based on CBT provides equal  benefits to conventional face-to-face CBT (472). 210 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

7.2 Mental health integrated in health  services Integrating mental health into general health  services is a crucial ingredient of mental health  reform (473). Integrated care helps to increase  access and reduce stigma. It means physical and  mental health problems can often be treated  simultaneously. It also makes mental health  services much more accessible, because general  health services are usually closer to where people  live. Therefore, integration advances UHC. Integrating mental health into general health  care has been an agreed policy objective  since the 1970s (474). It can be implemented  in different ways, at different levels and  through different services (475, 476). In the sections that follow we explore how strategies  for integrating mental health care can and have been  used in multiple settings, including primary care,  specific health programmes, and general hospitals. 7.2.1 Mental health in  primary care At primary levels of care, appropriate actions  for mental health are listed in WHO’s UHC  Compendium (see section 5.1.3 Evidence to  inform policy and practice) and operationalized  through WHO’s mhGAP programme (306). In practice, these interventions can be made  available within primary care by expanding the  mental health workforce in one of two main ways:  •	 building the capacity of general health care staff  in primary care settings to identify, assess and  manage mental health conditions, including in  children, adolescents, adults and older adults  (see Combining responsibilities for physical and  mental health in primary care); or •	 developing and embedding mental health care  providers into primary care settings (see Adding  staff to primary care). In both cases, collaboration between mental  and general health care providers can vary  in intensity – from operating independently  and simply referring people from one service  to another through to working as part of  the same team to deliver care at one site,  using one treatment or care plan (477). Integrated care is feasible,  affordable and cost–effective. For most common conditions, integrated  care by primary care staff trained in mental  health has been shown to deliver better  health outcomes compared with usual  primary health care (read Amira’s experience)  (296). It is also feasible, affordable and  cost–effective, including in LMICs (478). But integration is not without difficulty.  Some of the most frequently reported  barriers include (479, 258): •	 stigmatizing attitudes of health workers and the  public towards mental health; •	 inadequate training and supervision of health  workers; •	 high workloads among primary care staff; •	 low mental health awareness in the community; •	 health workers’ low interest and motivation  for change; •	 lack or inconsistent availability of essential  psychotropic medicines ; •	 disjointed management and leadership for  mental and physical health care; and •	 limited and inequitable funding. 211 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

NARRATIVE Join us as we spark a renaissance in  mental health Amira’s experience My experience with postpartum depression was  severe and painful. Like any mother, I waited  impatiently for my first child. But instead of being  happy to hold him to my chest, I found myself  drowning in sadness, isolation and aversion. At  that time the term “mental health” was not used  much in Jordan. I suffered for a long time. My depression became  chronic because of my ignorance and the  ignorance of those around me. I was exhausted  by the psychological pain and made multiple  suicide attempts. I thought the solution to my suffering might lie  in psychotherapy. But I was worried about being  stigmatized. I decided to visit a private mental  health clinic and I wore the niqab, so that no one  who knew me would see me. Here I found another  type of suffering: high prices and harassment. I  couldn’t afford the care I needed and experienced  relapses and setbacks. Eventually I decided to go a  government mental health clinic but even here there  were violations of human rights. We were all suffering  but no one dared to speak. Recovery was slow. Then God’s mercy descended, my country committed  to improving mental health, and mental health  care was integrated into a local clinic. I was one of  the first people to get it. A multi-speciality team  gave me psychological treatment and community  rehabilitation to support me to become an active  member of the community. The clinic specialists believed in our abilities and  we were invited by WHO to a workshop on human  rights. I was surprised and honoured to get to know  a group of people with psychological disabilities like  me who were terrorized and stigmatized by society.  We decided to establish an association, Our Step,  to support the rights of people with mental health  issues to be included in the community. Our cause  is beginning to see the light of day. We actively  participated in the production of Jordan’s first  national mental health strategy in 11 years. I have spent more than 15 years advocating and  raising awareness of the issues affecting people with  mental health conditions. I am very happy to have  represented them for the first time on the Board of  Trustees of the Supreme Council for the Rights of  Persons with Disabilities, after working to amend  the Law on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities  in keeping with the CRPD, which was ratified by  Jordan in 2008. We have achieved a lot, but much remains to be done  to realize the full rights of people with mental health  conditions. Don’t hesitate. Join us as we spark a  renaissance in mental health. Amira Ali Al-Jamal, Jordan 212 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

Heavy workloads can be particularly difficult  obstacles to overcome. Primary care workers  are often overburdened even before integrating  mental health care – which can be relatively  time-intensive – into their schedules. Combining responsibilities for physical  and mental health in primary care The first and most common way of integrating  mental health into primary care involves training  primary care medical staff in mental health care,  so that they can combine their usual physical  health care with caring for mental health  conditions (see Box 7.8 Integrated primary mental  health care in the Islamic Republic of Iran). Primary care staff need to develop competencies  for mental health care through pre-service  training, in-service training or both (see section  5.4.2 Strengthening general health care providers’  competencies). Even once they are trained,  these non-specialists need to be supported by  specialist services, whether in general hospitals  or through community mental health services,  for consultation, quality improvement and, if  needed, referrals. In countries where specialists  are few in number and widely dispersed, digital  technologies can be particularly important  for supportive supervision and mentoring. 213 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

CASE STUDY BOX 7.8 Integrated primary mental health care in the Islamic Republic of Iran For decades, the Islamic Republic of Iran has  progressively integrated mental health care  into its primary health care system. Starting  in 1989, community health workers (locally  known as “behvarzes”) were given mental health  responsibilities, including active case-finding and  referral. General practitioners were trained and  supported to provide mental health care as part  of their general health responsibilities, referring  people with complex problems to psychiatrists  and other mental health specialists at district or  provincial health centers. This model worked well in rural areas but was less  successful in urban areas, especially in the suburbs of  large cities, where health infrastructure and human  resources were severely lacking. In 2014, a new  framework for integration was adopted specifically  focused on overcoming the challenge in marginal  urban areas. The new model established two new  types of mental health service providers to work  alongside general practitioners. •	 “Moragheb-e salamat” serve as multipurpose  community health workers. They are the urban  counterpart to the established behvarzes and have  similar mental health responsibilities.  •	 Psychologists with a master’s degree in clinical  psychology provide mental health services at  urban health centers. They are responsible for  educating the public for primary prevention,  providing psychoeducation to people with mental  health conditions and their families, delivering  brief psychological interventions and telephone  follow-up for those in need, and referring people to  social services where relevant.  Evaluations of the new model show it has expanded  availability and access to mental health care in  marginal urban areas. Sources: Ahmed Hajebi, Director of Mental Health and Substance Use, Ministry of Health and Medical Education, Islamic Republic of Iran, personal  communication, April 2022; Smith, [PHONE_REDACTED]. Integrated care by non-specialists forms the basis for  WHO’s mhGAP roll out, which is being implemented  to strengthen skills and scale up mental health care  for priority conditions among young people, adults  and older adults in non-specialist settings all over  the world (see section 5.4.2 Strengthening general  health care providers’ competencies) (305). Studies  show the initiative improves knowledge, attitudes  and confidence among primary care providers after  training; and leads to improved symptoms and  engagement with care for people living with mental  health conditions (308). It has also been shown to  help reduce the treatment gap and increase effective  coverage for priority mental health conditions (see  Box 7.9 mhGAP in Nepal: closing the treatment gap). While mhGAP is most often used to scale up mental  health care for the general population, it can also  be used for specific groups, such as refugees (see  Box 7.10 mhGAP in Türkiye: scaling up services  for refugees) or youth. For example, in the Islamic  Republic of Iran, the mhGAP-IG is being used to  214 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

CASE STUDY strengthen the skills and confidence of family  doctors in child and adolescent mental health so  that they can treat priority conditions themselves,  rather than refer them to specialist centres. A humanitarian version of the mhGAP-IG  (mhGAP-HIG) also exists and is used widely by  international nongovernmental organizations  responding to humanitarian emergencies (481).  For example, it has been used to scale up mental  health care in the fragile and conflict-affected  context of Libya (482). Here, the Ministry of  Health, WHO, International Rescue Committee,  International Medical Corps and other partners  worked together to adapt mhGAP-HIG materials  for the local context, engaging stakeholders  early on to raise awareness and support for the  programme. Non-specialist health workers from  20 primary care facilities received the mhGAP-HIG  training; and local psychologists and psychiatrists were also trained in mhGAP supervision  and administration to make the programme  more sustainable. Once training was completed,  mobile units were dispatched and began  rotating to fill gaps across various municipalities  where services were limited or non-existent. BOX 7.9 mhGAP in Nepal: closing the treatment gap In Nepal, mhGAP was implemented as part of a  comprehensive mental health care plan in Chitwan  district. Non-specialists in primary care facilities  were trained and supervised to detect, diagnose and  begin treatment for priority mental health conditions  using the mhGAP-IG. Other strategies in the  Chitwan package included awareness raising, active  case-finding in the community; evidence-based lay  counselling in the community; and strengthening  referral, medicine supplies and monitoring  mechanisms within services, among other things. The plan effectively boosted mental health care  capacities and increased treatment coverage. After  implementing the district plan, the percentage  of people in the community receiving treatment  increased from 3% to 53% for psychosis, 0% to 12%  for depression, 1% to 12% for epilepsy, and 0% to 8%  for alcohol use disorder. The interventions in the Chitwan plan had results. A  year after starting treatment, people with depression,  alcohol use disorder and psychosis showed  improvements in symptoms and daily functioning.  Improvements among depressed people were  especially driven by the added value of psychological  treatment from the community counsellors. For all  conditions, combining demand- and supply-side  interventions encouraged people to take up  treatment and care. Importantly, people living with mental health  conditions, and their care-givers, perceived the  primary care-based mental health services provided  in Chitwan as accessible, acceptable and effective. Sources: Jordans et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Luitel et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 215 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

CASE STUDY BOX 7.10 mhGAP in Türkiye: scaling up care for refugees In 2021, Türkiye was home to an estimated 3.7  million Syrian refugees living under temporary  protection, which entitles them to free essential  health care. Refugees are known to be at higher risk  of mental health conditions. And yet they are often  less likely to access care. Back in 2016, Türkiye began using mhGAP to train  Syrian and Turkish primary care providers to deliver  essential mental health care through refugee health  centres and community mental health services. By 2021, nearly 2 600 doctors had been trained across  the 29 (out of 81) provinces where large numbers  of refugees live. That means around 8% of Turkish  general practitioners working in primary care settings  (2 100 people) and more than 50% of Syrian doctors  (561 people) have now been trained using mhGAP. Assessments indicate that more than 95% of the  trainees found the training useful and beneficial. The  training led to a statistically significant knowledge  increase in Turkish and Syrian doctors; and  participating doctors were also found to be more  attentive to people’s mental health needs, resulting  in more people with mental health conditions being  identified and treated. Most doctors were observed  to comply with standards of care defined in training.  And 96% of people who received services from the  newly-trained doctors said they were satisfied with  the quality of mental health care provided. Source: Kahiloğulları et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. The programme has increased workforce  capacity and confidence, and has strengthened referral pathways between community  providers and health system facilities. It has  also helped increase awareness of mental  health’s importance and has increased access  to services for refugees and migrants. More  than 1 000 people living with mental health  conditions gained access to the services they  needed through this initiative in 2020 alone. Adding staff to primary care The second way to integrate mental health in  primary care is to embed mental health care  providers in primary care settings. Depending  on the context and resources available, these  additional staff may be child or adult psychiatrists  or psychologists, nurses trained in child or adult  mental health, social workers, care managers,  community workers or other community  providers trained in mental health care. These staff may work full-time in a single  clinic (for example, when a care manager  or a non-specialist counsellor is added) or  they may divide their time across multiple  clinics (for example, when a psychiatrist or  psychiatric nurse runs fortnightly mental health  clinics at different primary care facilities). 216 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

CASE STUDY BOX 7.11 Sri Lanka: adding community workers for mental health to primary health care In Sri Lanka, the need for and interest in mental  health after the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami led  to the creation of a new category of community  worker, called the community support officer. Closely  connected to the primary health care system, and  technically accountable to mental health staff in  district hospitals, these community support officers  supported thousands of people with mental health  conditions living in the community. They were also  responsible for a large proportion of referrals to the  hospital-based psychiatric units, accounting for up to  three-quarters of all referrals in some districts. Although the programme was not sustained, an  evaluation in 2010 showed that 128 community  support officers in three districts were case-managing  more than 1 500 people with mental health  conditions in the community. Source: Kakuma et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. In addition to adding staff to primary care clinics,  countries have added community workers to  the health care system to better address mental  health. Indeed, primary care facilities can extend  their reach for mental health through networks  of supervised lay workers in the community (see  Box 7.11 Sri Lanka: adding community workers  for mental health to primary health care). Collaborative care Collaborative care is one specific and  well-studied example of the second approach  to integration (485). It is a multi-component  model of integration with a large body of  evidence – including from LMICs – strongly  supporting its use in managing depression and  other common mental health conditions (17). In collaborative care models, a health team  shares tasks, with a care manager playing  a central role and coordinating the care.  For example, in collaborative care for  depression, people with depression typically: •	 are identified with a validated  depression measure (a task often done  by the care manager); •	 are linked with relevant resources in the  community to address any social needs  or determinants (also often done by the  care manager); •	 receive evidence-based psychological  interventions (a task in LMICs often done  by the care manager or, where available,  by a non-specialist counsellor); •	 are prescribed medication if indicated (a task  done by a general medical care provider); and •	 have their depression monitored over the course  of their care. This is done by administering the  same measure at the beginning of every visit,  and recording the results in a simple registry that  is regularly reviewed to inform changes to care.  Changes potentially include stepping up the  intensity of care and specialist referral. 217 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

As part of the team-based care, a mental health  care specialist regularly advises and supervises  the care manager and general medical care  provider. In all cases, care plans are tailored  to the person’s needs and preferences. Collaborative care has been applied in diverse  programmes all over the world. This includes  some programmes targeted at integrating  depression care within care for specific physical  health conditions such as diabetes (486). Most implementation of collaborative care  has been done in high-income countries; but  experience with collaborative care in LMICs is  growing, including for psychosis (442, 487). In high- and low-resource settings alike, collaborative care ensures that key social, psychological  and medical aspects of care are addressed in a  holistic way. And it has been shown to be even  more effective and cost–effective than routine  integration of mental health in general health care  (488). But collaborative care requires additional  resources (most notably the care manager’s  time), which has been a barrier to scale-up. 7.2.2 Mental health in specific  health programmes Integrating mental health in health programmes  for specific physical diseases or populations  has proven both feasible and cost–effective,  improving both mental and physical health  (486, 489, 490). Providing care in the same place,  by the same practitioner or treatment team  and at the same time, greatly helps reduce the  logistical challenges of receiving care through  two or more systems and enables more holistic,  person-centred care. Importantly, it can also  help services reach vulnerable people with  higher risk of mental health conditions. Mental health in disease-specific  services  People with comorbidities who are supported  through integrated care models are more likely to  have better health outcomes and to experience  better quality of life, self-care and adherence to  medical and mental health interventions (476). Global targets for HIV/AIDS in particular  underscore the need to better integrate mental  health and social care with HIV services, including  those led by communities (491). The opportunities for integration are plentiful – from  services targeted at HIV prevention and testing  to those for starting and managing treatment  to services for viral suppression and care for  people living with HIV (166). Development agency  guidance for TB care similarly recommends  integrating mental health services within TB  programmes, from training to treatment (167). There is plenty of evidence to show that  integration, for example through task-sharing  with lay health workers, can improve the  mental health of people living with HIV; even  in extremely remote and disadvantaged  communities (492). It can also improve the  physical health of HIV-affected communities by  reducing the risk and stigma of infection and  boosting adherence to antiretroviral treatment. Integrating mental health  into HIV programmes has the  potential to avoid nearly a  million new infections by 2030.  218 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

Incorporating mental health care into TB  programmes can be similarly beneficial.  In Pakistan, for example, psychological  counselling for people attending TB clinics  with signs of depression and anxiety has  been found to both reduce symptoms and  improve TB treatment completion (493). Research suggests that integrating mental  health into HIV programmes has the potential  to reduce the rate of infection for HIV by  10–17%, avoiding possibly nearly a million  new infections by [PHONE_REDACTED]. For TB the  research predicts an even greater decrease  (13–20%) in infection rates, with the potential  to avoid up to 14 million infections by 2030. Beyond HIV and TB, there are many  opportunities to integrate mental health  into disease-specific care, including  programmes for NCDs or NTDs (174, 168). In South Africa, an integrated chronic disease  management model has been developed  to increase systems efficiencies and  cost–effectiveness, and deal with comorbidities  (495). The model is supported by Adult Primary  Care, a clinical decision support tool that primary  care providers can use to deliver comprehensive,  quality clinical care to adults in every consultation.  The model is innovative in that it enables care  providers to treat all chronic conditions – both  physical and mental – together. So, for example,  rather than running separate clinics for diabetes,  hypertension, HIV and mental health, the primary  care facility uses routine consultations to provide  chronic care for all these conditions at once. For  people with comorbidities this approach makes  care logistically easier; it also enables a more  holistic and person-centred approach to their care. Mental health in population-specific  services Just as mental health can be integrated into  physical disease programmes, so too can it  be integrated into health services for specific  groups, including women, parents and caregivers,  children, adolescents and older adults. Programmes for women’s health can offer a  discrete way of providing not only reproductive  health care but also mental health care  to women affected by sexual violence, a  highly potent risk factor for mental health  conditions. Such programmes are quite often  made available to populations affected by  armed conflict and forced displacement. Similarly, perinatal programmes offer a good  platform for educating parents and other  caregivers about mental health, screening them  for mental health conditions, delivering basic  therapies and proving peer support (496). Integrating mental health in perinatal  programmes is especially important because  maternal mental ill-health is common and  impacts both mothers and infants (see  section 6.3.2 Protecting and promoting child  and adolescent mental health) (497). Maternal (and paternal) mental health conditions  are treatable, including by trained non-specialists  through maternal and infant health services (498).  For example, in Uganda, trained and supervised  midwives screen pregnant women for perinatal  depression in maternal care settings; and treat  those screening positive with group-based  problem-solving therapy given during scheduled  antenatal visits. Studies show significant  improvement in treated women’s clinical and  functional outcomes after six months (499). 219 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

7.2.3 Mental health in  general hospitals However much mental health services are  provided through primary health care, it is  essential to have dedicated mental health  services at secondary care level. Without  these, investments in primary health  care are unlikely to be sustainable (258).  Providing mental health in secondary care is  a cornerstone for mental health reform. Providing mental health in  secondary care is a cornerstone  for mental health reform. Secondary level services – which may employ  both specialists and non-specialists – can be  provided through general hospitals (as discussed  in this section) or through a range of formal  community mental health services (as discussed  in section 7.3 Community mental health services). General hospitals have a multifaceted role in  the mental health system, which may include: •	 Outpatient care to assess and manage people  of all ages (including children and older  adults) with complex, refractory and severe  presentations that cannot be easily dealt with in  primary health care. •	 Short-term inpatient care for people  experiencing acute episodes or mental health  crises that may benefit from hospitalization.  This may be through acute inpatient units  or, when resources are very scarce, through  psychiatry beds in general wards. •	 Support for non-specialists in primary care  through training, supportive supervision  and mentoring. •	 Support for long-term care of people with  chronic mental health conditions living in  the community in circumstances where  community-based mental health services are  unable to help sufficiently. •	 Liaison psychiatric care for people hospitalized  for physical health problems. •	 Mobile teams to provide outreach or crisis  services in the community. General hospital-based mental health services  are usually well accepted by the community.  Those in urban centres in large districts may  be hard to access for remote communities  but they are much more accessible than, and  preferable to, psychiatric institutions.  General hospital-based mental  health services are more accessible  than psychiatric institutions. Experience shows that it is possible to provide  quality mental health care in general hospital  settings and that this can complement other  community-based mental health services  (see Box 7.12 Dominican Republic: putting  regional hospitals centre stage). In Brazil, for  example, hospital-based services complement  local community mental health centres by  reserving a limited number of beds specifically  for referrals, usually during a crisis situation or  because of a comorbidity that requires both  psychiatric and medical care. Only staff from  the community mental health centre can ask  for a bed, which prevents inappropriate use  and unnecessary hospitalizations (500). In Brazil and beyond, countries have shown  that hospital-based services can be delivered  in a non-coercive way that respects a person’s  autonomy and treatment preferences and  supports them towards recovery (500). 220 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

CASE STUDY BOX 7.12 Dominican Republic: putting regional hospitals centre stage The Dominican Republic has been reforming its  mental health care since 2014. Its mental health  plan, which is backed by policy and legislation and  overseen by the Ministry of Public Health, has long  focused on closing the country’s only psychiatric  hospital while simultaneously building up a network  of community-based services. These include clinical  services and support embedded in general health  facilities, alongside day centres and supported living  services to support psychosocial rehabilitation. Mental health units within general hospitals play a  critical part in enabling the country’s plans for mental  health reform. These crisis intervention units were  conceived to respond to the psychiatric hospital  closure, initially for the capital metropolitan area  and later expanding to the rest of the country. Today,  these units cater for all people with mental health  conditions that cannot be easily looked after in  primary health care.  The hospital-based units provide: •	 crisis services, including beds for short-term stays  where needed; •	 outpatient psychiatric and psychological care for  people who have been discharged from hospital  but not yet referred to outpatient services; and •	 liaison psychiatry and health psychology with  other hospital services. The hospital-based mental health units are closely  linked to both primary and tertiary care facilities,  providing the lynchpin for a robust referral system  that spans all three levels of care. Since 2008, the number of mental health units in  district hospitals has grown from 9 to 15, with the  number of short-stay beds available similarly growing  from 76 to 113. Overall, these units make up more  than half (53%) of all public sector mental health beds  available in the country, compared with 33% in 2008. Sources: PAHO, personal communication, January 2022; Ministerio de Salud, [PHONE_REDACTED]; WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 221 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

7.3 Community mental health services Community mental health services such  as general hospital services are part of the  secondary care system and, compared with  psychiatric institutions, generate better mental  health outcomes (426).  Community mental health services comprise a mix  of services that provide clinical care and support,  psychosocial rehabilitation and residential  services, as described in the sections that follow.  They have a large role in providing outreach  services to deliver care and support in people’s  homes or in public spaces; and to disseminate  information about mental health and engage  in mental health prevention and promotion. 7.3.1 Community mental  health centres and teams Clinical care and support for people with mental  health conditions, including crisis and outreach  services, are often provided through community  mental health centres or teams, but can also  be delivered through drop-in centres. In all  cases, community mental health centres and  teams may offer links with peer support services  (see section 7.3.2 Peer support services). Community mental health centres In many countries, community mental health  centres are the cornerstone of community-based  care. These centres are typically staffed by  multidisciplinary teams and need to be well  connected with primary care facilities, local  hospitals and with organizations beyond the  health sector (see Box 7.13 Peru: comprehensive community-based mental health care). 222 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

CASE STUDY BOX 7.13 Peru: comprehensive community-based mental health care In 2013, Peru’s Ministry of Health estimated mental  health conditions were very prevalent but few  people could access the care they needed. So began  a series of reforms to enable mental health care for  all. Following progressive legislation to add mental  health care coverage to the national health insurance  scheme and secure the rights of people with mental  health conditions, health authorities have adopted a  multi-pronged approach to establish comprehensive  community-based care across the country (see Figure). At the core of Peru’s approach lies a network  of community mental health centres that has  grown ninefold from 2015 to 2021, stretching  across every region. These centres are staffed by a  multidisciplinary team and serve a population of  around [PHONE_REDACTED], providing mental health treatment  and rehabilitation for adults, adolescents and  children. Each one organizes community activities  including mental health promotion and prevention  initiatives. They also support primary health care  providers with training and technical assistance. The community mental health centres are  complemented by 30 specialized units in general  hospitals and 55 protected homes (hogares  protegidos) that provide accommodation and 24/7  care for people with relatively high support needs or  weak family support systems, and for women who are  victims of domestic violence. The specialized units in  general hospitals offer short-term hospitalization only. Together, the community mental health centres,  protected homes and specialized units in general  hospitals ensure that people who would otherwise  end up in psychiatric hospitals can be cared for in  their own communities. As such, these facilities  play an important part in providing accessible and  acceptable mental health care. The Ministry of Health plans to continue expanding  the network to ensure that comprehensive  community-based mental health care is available to all. FIGURE Expanding mental health care in Peru,  2014–2020. Source: Ministerio de Salud, [PHONE_REDACTED]. Figure source: Mental health atlas, WHO, unpublished raw data, 2014 and 2020. Total workforce Psychiatrist Psychologist Mental health nurse [PHONE_REDACTED].4 28 0.8 4 WORKFORCE 5.1 19 6.1 3.9 Community mental health centres Protected homes [PHONE_REDACTED]COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES [PHONE_REDACTED].3% 2.3% MENTAL HEALTH  EXPENDITURE As % of total government health  expenditure No. workers per [PHONE_REDACTED]population 223 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

Community mental health centres may cater  for a range of mental health conditions in  adults, children and adolescents alike. They  look different in different countries but often  have a multi-faceted role in supporting people  (see Fig. 7.4). In community mental health  centres people usually receive services for  acute episodes or relapses in functioning, and  may be admitted for short periods. Individuals  may also be admitted as part of respite care.  Or they may attend the centre during the day  for regular check-ups and to receive daytime  medical or psychological care, or to take part in  therapeutic groups and recovery programmes. Often, community mental health centres also have  spaces and activities to support participation in  community life (503). In Brazil, for example, each  centre includes common areas for socializing,  interacting and eating alongside individual  counselling rooms and a group activities room.  Some centres will also hold activities and events  in the community using public spaces such as  parks, community leisure centres and museums. FIG. 7.4. Examples of services that can be provided by community mental health centres  TREATMENT •  •  •  •  •  •  Consultations Individual and group therapies Follow-up support Day care Home visits Medication (prescription and supply) OVERNIGHT CARE • Short-term emergency care SUPPORT GROUPS • Peer support groups • Support groups for families • Caregivers support groups  COORDINATION • Across health care levels and settings •   With community partners for  housing and social support SOCIAL INCLUSION • Social and cultural events • Educational activities • Economic activities COMMUNITY OUTREACH • Awareness campaigns • Trainings COMMUNITY  MENTAL HEALTH  SERVICES 224 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

Community mental health teams Some countries use community mental health  teams to provide community clinical care and  support. These teams may work across different  facilities, such as general hospitals, primary  care clinics or community health centres.  There may be different teams for different age  groups. They may provide clinical services in  non-health settings such as prisons. And they  may provide home-based care if it is needed. Members of the community mental health team  work together to support multiple needs of  people living with mental health conditions.  They fill the gap between care provided by  generalists, as part of primary health care,  and hospital care. They can support people to  avoid hospitalization during periods of crisis. Mental health teams can also be providers of  specialized early interventions for people in  a clinical high-risk state for psychosis, often  blending home-based care with inputs from family  and friends (see Box 7.14 Services for people with  first-episode psychosis). Specialized early intervention in psychosis is becoming common practice  in high-income countries. Experts suggest that  these preventive interventions may be adapted  for LMIC settings by incorporating the principles  and therapeutic ingredients of early intervention  into mental health services in LMICs (504, 505). Depending on resource availability, teams may  be large and fully multisectoral, comprising  a psychiatrist, psychologist, psychiatric  nurse, social worker and occupational  therapist, or they may be much smaller  and made up of one or two mental health  professionals that focus on specific services. As a specialized and dedicated service, community  mental health teams can fulfil various important  functions within a community-based network of  services. Some of the roles they have may include: •	 training, supervising and supporting  non-specialist primary health care providers; •	 delivering clinical interventions for people  who are experiencing conditions that are too  complex to be cared for in primary care, but that  do not necessarily require hospitalization; and •	 carrying out preventive and promotive activities  in their area. In some countries, where primary health care is  run by nurses who are not allowed to prescribe  psychotropic medicines, an important function  of community mental health teams may be to  provide initial assessment and prescription  services that can prevent hospital visits (see Box  7.15 Community mental health teams in Georgia). 225 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

CASE STUDY BOX 7.14 Services for people with first-episode psychosis Over the past three decades, evidence-based early  psychosis prevention and intervention programmes  for adolescents and young adults experiencing a  first episode of psychosis have emerged. Starting in  Australia, a range of early psychosis services have  been launched in high-income countries worldwide.  Such services are typically available 24 hours a day,  seven days a week, with referrals from any source  and a single telephone contact point. The first phase of care involves a face-to-face  assessment of the young person. The meeting is  usually in the young person’s home and includes  inputs from family, friends and other supports to try  to understand what is happening and what kind of  support the young person needs. A multidisciplinary team then provides intensive,  home-based case management. Caring at the  person’s home means friends and family can help  the young person as needed, with mental health  professionals providing regular support. Psychosocial interventions vary according to the  person’s needs. For example, as recovery progresses,  counselling can help the young person learn practical  ways to prevent further episodes, such as by  managing stress and recognizing early warning signs.  Treatment also involves working with the person to  identify what is important to them in their recovery.  This can mean returning to school, getting a job,  finding accommodation, getting financial help, or  making new friends. One-to-one counselling, group  activities and activity-based therapies are used to  help achieve these goals. Although the focus is on community services,  spending some time in hospital during an episode  of psychosis before continuing with home-based  treatment is sometimes part of the care. Overnight  care is provided in a youth-friendly setting and in  most instances is only short term. Source: Orygen Youth Health, [PHONE_REDACTED]. Community mental health teams are usually  mobile so that they can reach out to diverse  facilities within an area. This generally takes some  of the financial burden away from the user and so  encourages people to engage in ongoing care.  This is particularly important in more rural areas  where, for example, access to the local clinic may  be relatively easy while access to the nearest  hospital may be too difficult or costly to consider. Services provided by community mental health  teams are not necessarily available all day  every day, which may be inconvenient to some  people; although they can be provided on an  appointment basis for regular, set days. Having community mental health teams can  substantially reduce the number of people  needing hospital care, and putting resources  into this level is often cost–effective and  helps hospitals from being overwhelmed. 226 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

CASE STUDY BOX 7.15 Community mental health teams in Georgia In Georgia, community mental health teams provide  specialized secondary level services designed to care  for adults with severe mental health conditions close  to where they live. Each team accepts referrals from outpatient  mental health centres, after a person has been  diagnosed with a mental health condition, and if  that person meets certain criteria (i.e. several past  hospitalizations). The teams then provide a range of  treatment and rehabilitation services. Across the country there are 32 community mental  health teams in operation, serving 28 locations. The  teams work out of mobile clinics and provide mental  health care to adults (aged 18 years or more) based  on informed consent. People attend the mobile  clinics to consult a psychiatrist, review and receive  prescriptions for psychotropic medicines where  appropriate, receive basic psychoeducation and  access psychosocial support in solving social issues. Georgia’s community mental health teams are  multidisciplinary in nature and comprise at least  three specialists. One member of the team is a  team leader who carries out overall supervision of  the working process. A psychiatrist is a necessary  member of the team while other team members  may include social workers, psychologists, nurses or  junior doctors. From 2015 to 2022 the number of community  mental health teams in Georgia increased from 3  in Tbilisi to 32 across different districts. As a whole,  the network of community mental health teams  includes 33 psychiatrists and 66 allied mental health  practitioners working to provide community-based  mental health care to Georgia’s population of more  than 3.7 million people. This growth was made possible by the Health  Ministry prioritizing community-based mental health  care, including a twelve-fold increase in budget  allocation for community mental health teams. Sources: E Chkonia, G Geleishvili and N Makhashvili, Georgia, personal communications, 2021–2022. Often one member of the team will take on the  role of care coordinator or case manager, working  with individuals to codevelop care plans. The teams can boost people’s uptake of, and  satisfaction with, mental health services.  They increase continuity and flexibility of  care. And people cared for by the teams are  significantly less likely to be admitted to  hospital or to use social services than people  accessing standard mental health care (507). Community mental health teams usually operate  within a defined geographical area and are  equipped to provide a broad range of interventions. In some high-income countries, specialized  teams have been developed as an additional  service to achieve specific goals or reach  specific groups. For example, many European  countries use assertive community treatment  (ACT) teams to provide specialized mobile  outreach treatment for hard-to-reach children  227 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

and adolescents living with severe mental  health conditions (508). Research suggests that  these active approaches can reduce hospital  admissions as well as improving symptoms and  general functioning of both adults and youth  with severe mental health conditions (509). Crisis services Mental health crisis services are designed to  support people experiencing acute mental health  needs, either because of a suddenly deteriorating  mental health condition or because of a new need  for urgent help. They are largely provided through  community mental health centres and teams and  may include daytime emergency care or overnight  stays at a facility (including for respite). They may  also be offered through specialized units in general  hospitals. For example, in the Dominican Republic,  crisis services that include short-term stays where  necessary are provided at both regional hospitals  (see Box 7.12 Dominican Republic: putting regional  hospitals centre stage) and referral hospitals. In some countries, crisis houses and safe havens in  community settings provide an additional option  for people who do not want to go to hospital.  Crisis houses usually offer intensive treatment and  overnight accommodation in a small number of  beds. Safe havens do not necessarily have beds  but are open overnight as supportive places for  people to go during a crisis. Some crisis houses  and safe havens are open to anyone experiencing  acute mental health needs; others are designed  for specific groups, such as homeless women  or adolescents at imminent risk of suicide. In some countries, people can also access expert  advice and support during a mental health crisis  without having to leave home. Sometimes this  is because home treatment teams are available  to provide rapid assessment, support and  intensive care in a person’s home. This type of  treatment minimizes disruption to a person’s  life and considers ways in which family and  social networks can help the recovery process,  particularly for children and adolescents. In most countries, crisis services provided  by specialists are complemented by 24-hour  helplines that are usually staffed by trained and  supervised volunteers who can refer people  needing additional help to professionals (see  Box 7.16 Malaysia: helplines for mental health). 228 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

CASE STUDY BOX 7.16 Malaysia: helplines for mental health In Malaysia, the government and nongovernmental  organizations run multiple helplines to provide  psychological support during a mental health crisis. Befrienders hotline. Befrienders provides free  emotional support from trained volunteers 24 hours  a day, 7 days a week, to anyone feeling lonely, in  distress or despair, or having suicidal thoughts. Lifeline counselling. Lifeline Association Malaysia  offers free counselling by trained volunteers  face-to-face, over the phone or by email. All  counsellors receive supervision and support; and  volunteers with more than three years’ experience  play a large part in training new recruits. Survivor hotlines. The Women’s Aid Organization  (WAO) and All Women’s Action Society both provide  free and confidential crisis services, including phone  or online counselling, to survivors of violence. During  the COVID-19 pandemic, WAO provided more than  7 100 consultations via phone, SMS and email. MHPSS hotline. In partnership with Mercy Malaysia,  the Ministry of Health established the MHPSS  hotline to support people coping with the impacts of  COVID-19. It is staffed by a mix of ministry counsellors  and trained lay volunteers. From January to June  2021, the hotline received more than [PHONE_REDACTED]calls  asking for support. Around 90% of these were related  to social problems such as unemployment, loss of  income, and family-related issues. Sources: AIA Malaysia, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Kaos, [PHONE_REDACTED].  Supporting the transition from  adolescent to adult mental health care Standard mental health care is usually provided  via two discrete systems, child and adolescent  mental health services (CAMHS) and adult  mental health services. In most LMICs, child  and adolescent mental health services are  much less available than adult ones (512). In most countries, the upper eligibility limit  for child and adolescent services is around  16–18 years, after which a young person with  ongoing needs may be obliged to transition to  adult services. A significant weakness in overall  service provision is that this transition is far  from fluid. Where referral pathways between  the two systems are imperfect, people can drop  out or fall between the two sets of services.  Some young people, although unwell, may not  meet the eligibility thresholds for care by adult  services. Moreover, youth often experience a  dramatic difference in care when transitioning  from child and adolescent to adult services. The transition from child and  adolescent to adult mental health  services is often far from fluid. In response, there has been a growing movement  to develop integrated community-based hubs  providing uninterrupted services for adolescents  and young adults (usually 12–25 years).  229 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

CASE STUDY In addition to mental health services, these hubs  often deliver other health and social services  in a single community-based setting (see Box  7.17 Headspace: no wrong door for young  people in Australia and Denmark). They are  sometimes referred to as “one-stop services”. 7.3.2 Peer support services Peer support services in mental health care  are about people using their own experiences  to help each other – by sharing knowledge,  providing emotional support, creating opportunities for social interaction, offering practical  help or engaging in advocacy and awareness  raising. A systematic review of 30 randomized  trials found that these services may be effective  for clinical and personal recovery from mental  illness (Dorien Smit, Pro Persona Mental Health  Care, unpublished data, March 2022). Effects are  modest, though consistent, suggesting potential  efficacy for these services across a wide range of  mental health conditions and intervention types. Peer support services are not regulated and  come in many different shapes and sizes and  may be offered at different levels of health care.  They may be self-help groups of peers that meet  face-to-face to exchange psychosocial support  (read Dixoni’s experience) or plan local advocacy  activities (see Box 7.18 Kenya: USP-K peer support  groups) (509). They may be online therapy groups  that are led by a trained peer. Or they may be a  mentoring or befriending service that connects  people on a one-to-one basis (312). In all cases,  the aim is to support people on their chosen path  to recovery in a way that protects confidentiality  and is free from judgment and assumptions. Peer supporters are similarly varied. They may be  staff hired by mental health services, advocates  appointed through a peer-led network, or  volunteers with lived experience. In all cases BOX 7.17 Headspace: no wrong door for young people in Australia and Denmark Headspace started in 2006 in Australia, to address the  gap in mental health services for young people aged  12–25 years. There are now more than 100 Headspace  centres in Australia and 28 in Denmark. Local young people help design each centre and the  services it provides. And each centre is deliberately  located near public transport hubs for easy access.  Mental health professionals at the centres provide  evidence-based psychological care; and young  people can also access physical and sexual health  services, and work and study support. A key feature of Headspace is the “no wrong door”  policy. This means that young people can refer  themselves or be referred from any service. All  centres routinely report data to a national database  that is used to monitor and evaluate service activity  and outcomes and inform continuous improvement. Sources: Headspace, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Rickwood et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 230 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

NARRATIVE they are experts by experience and can draw  on their first-hand knowledge to connect with  and relate to people experiencing mental  health conditions. Peer supporters can  serve as compassionate listeners, educators,  coaches, advocates, partners and mentors. In many cases peers may share characteristics  not directly related to mental health, such as  age or ethnicity, that can help people feel more  comfortable and confident about seeking help. For  example, in the Michigan Peer-to-Peer Depression  Awareness Programme in the United States, which  aimed to support early detection and treatment  of depression in school settings, students acted  as peer advocates (515). They designed and  implemented depression awareness campaigns  to help create a supportive school environment  and to connect their peers with appropriate  resources, information, and venues for mental  health care. One year after the programme,  students reported feeling more comfortable and  confident speaking to their peers about mental  health issues; and said they were more likely to  ask for help if they had symptoms of depression. Gratitude and generosity is my cure Dixoni’s experience  I have three siblings. My mother and father were of  a different tribe, kind but very reserved. There was  no closeness. Going to school was difficult for me. It  was noisy and boisterous, and I was bullied. To avoid  attention I could not handle, I became invisible. At  the coming of age, I began to be what I call “screwed  up”. I found it difficult to move out in the world and I  did not know what was happening to me. I felt I had  lost my soul.  For years, I was very unwell. One week down, then  high for a while, anxious for a few days, then not  sleeping. My emotions were all over the shop. I was  in soul pain. A few of my friends from college died by  suicide. I tried it once myself. I was hanging in there. Then my luck changed. I started a new medication and  started seeing my college psychologist for guidance  and counselling. Soon I was feeling a lot better. Now  I’m quite well although I still get nervous with people.  It takes a long time for your self-esteem to grow. Today I live happily on my own. I attend GROW,  a self-help peer group where I get friendship and  support. I take an interest in spirituality. Being at the  bottom actually helped me see that there are things  more important than the rat race. I have found that gratitude and generosity is a cure  for me feeling miserable and small. I am beginning  to like myself. Dixoni Emmanuel, United Republic of Tanzania 231 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

CASE STUDY BOX 7.18 Kenya: USP-K peer support groups The Users and Survivors of Psychiatry in Kenya (USP-K)  is a peer-led national membership organization  that works to promote the rights of people with  psychosocial disabilities. As part of its activities, USP-K  runs community-based peer support groups where  people with lived experience can come together  to share their stories, give each other psychosocial  support and discuss specific issues, for example, crisis  response strategies or local livelihoods. Since launching its first peer support group in Nairobi  in 2012, USP-K has developed a network of 13 groups  across six counties in Kenya. Each group is run by  a group-appointed peer and meets regularly, with  20–35 people attending each meeting. Each group  also has two-way links to local health facilities  through a community health or social worker that  forms part of the group and through a strong referral  system in which mental health professionals can refer  individuals to the peer support groups. USP-K estimates that in total its peer support  groups have given more than 200 people access to  mental health services within their community. The  organization further reports that the peer support  groups have reduced stigma and discrimination,  empowered members to self-advocate and enhanced  overall well-being and independent living. Sources: WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]; USP Kenya, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 232 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

7.3.3 Psychosocial  rehabilitation Just as clinical care is a key component of  community mental health services, so too is  psychosocial rehabilitation, which involves a set  of activities focused on improving functioning  and reducing disability for people with mental  health conditions (517). Community-based  psychosocial rehabilitation supports people  to achieve their optimal functioning and  inclusion in the community. It involves both  improving people’s competencies and making  environmental changes so that people with  mental health conditions can live a productive  and satisfying life in the community. Person-centred, recovery-oriented, human rights  based support is essential (see section 7.1.1  Putting people first). And ensuring the availability  of psychosocial rehabilitation activities in the  community is not just important for successful  deinstitutionalization, but also to address people’s  needs for social inclusion and independent  living, in line with their will and preferences. Community mental health centres and teams  have a large role in supporting psychosocial  rehabilitation through a mix of routine, outreach  and livelihood activities. These may include things  such as peer group discussions, independent  living and social skills training, housing support,  education and vocational assistance, activities that  strengthen social support networks, and leisure  activities. Providing support to access health  and social services such as housing or welfare  benefits is also part of psychosocial rehabilitation. Community-based psychosocial rehabilitation  is often delivered in partnership with nongovernmental partners. It may be provided through  day-care centres or “clubhouses” run by civil  society organizations (see Box 7.19 Fountain  House: clubhouses for recovery). Clubhouses  may include specific programmes to tailor  support for different age groups. For example,  programmes for young adults (18–25 years of  age) may focus on encouraging autonomy and  independence and offer support in applying for  jobs, accessing further education and finding  their own place to live. Programmes for older  adults on the other hand may focus on reducing  social isolation and supporting friendships and  social connections, including by overcoming  transportation barriers and building confidence  in using technology for staying connected. Psychosocial rehabilitation may also be  provided through other models of task-sharing  with non-specialists and community providers  drawn from local communities. Experience  shows that involving local communities in  delivering community-based rehabilitation can  complement specialist services and improve  access, equity and acceptability of interventions  (see Box 7.20 Living with psychosis: three tiers  for community-based rehabilitation) (518). 233 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

BOX 7.19 Fountain House: clubhouses for recovery For more than 65 years, Fountain House has been  supporting people with severe mental health  conditions through its pioneering clubhouse model  of psychosocial rehabilitation. Clubhouses are  organized as a support system for people living with  mental health conditions, rather than as a formal  service or treatment programme. What began as a social club in New York City in 1948  has evolved into a global network of more than 300  clubhouses in more than 30 countries, including  Argentina, China, India, and Russia. Each clubhouse  is founded on the belief that everyone can recover  from the effects of mental health conditions enough  to lead a personally satisfying life in the community.  To that end, each clubhouse provides a blend of  basic health and social services that not only aims to  meet basic needs but also emphasizes individuals’  goals and aspirations. Clubhouses are recovery-oriented participatory  communities, where members and staff work  together to maintain day-to-day operations.  Together, they run activities aimed at supporting  members to return to school or work, access  community-based housing, promote wellness,  reduce hospitalizations and improve social  relationships. In all cases, members choose when  and how to participate. Close partnerships with the health system enable  clubhouses to influence and drive the quality of  health care offered to people with severe mental  health conditions and to ensure person-centred care  that traverses health and social needs. Fountain House clubhouses are effective at  promoting employment, reducing hospitalizations  and improving quality of life. They can also help  improve educational attainment and create a  greater sense of community, translating into higher  ratings of self-empowerment and self-confidence  for members. For young adults, clubhouses can  help bridge the gap between child and adult  mental health care, continuing support into later  life if needs be. Sources: McKay et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Pardi et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. CASE STUDY 234 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

CASE STUDY BOX 7.20 Living with psychosis: three tiers for community-based rehabilitation In remote and rural India, a tiered approach to  community-based rehabilitation has offered a  feasible and effective model of care for people living  with chronic schizophrenia, bipolar affective disorder  and other psychoses. The approach, which was applied in partnership  with local nongovernmental organizations Ashagram  Trust, comprised three tiers of service delivery. •	 Outpatient clinics, where a psychiatrist  conducted clinical reviews, prescribed  psychotropic medications and, working with a  psychologist, provided psychoeducation and  family counselling. •	 Community health workers, who were trained to  provide psychoeducation and basic psychosocial  interventions for improving personal care, linking  people to general health and job opportunities and  improving social inclusion by enhancing social and  political participation. •	 Families and village health groups (samitis), who  help strengthen social networks and promote  social and economic participation, including by  providing access to micro-credit. The approach has been applied in four blocks  (sub-districts) of India and in each case was found to  be effective in overcoming barriers to care, leading to  better treatment adherence, reduced disability and  improved social inclusion. In Pati, where the tiered  model of care was evaluated four years after starting,  more than 80% of participants were found to have  taken part in community activities such as weddings  and community festivals. Most had also exercised  their rights as citizens by attending village council  meetings and voting in village elections. Sources: Chatterjee et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Chatterjee et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 235 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

7.3.4 Supported living services Where feasible, supported living services (or  supported housing) are another important  component of community mental health  services. They serve a small minority of people  living with mental health conditions, specifically  those who have complex, long-term needs. For these people, supported living services help  avoid hospital care (454). They are also a crucial  support for many long-term residents once they  are being discharged during deinstitutionalization  (read Alejandra’s experience). In Brazil, the deinstitutionalization strategy  includes two complementary services to address  housing needs of former long-term residents: •	 the Therapeutic Residential Service, which  comprises houses for up to eight people located  in urban spaces; and •	 the De Volta para Casa programme, which  provides financial support for assistance, follow  up and resocialization outside the hospital. Today in Brazil, more than 4 000 people who  were hospitalized for long periods are living  with their families or in residential therapeutic  services and receiving benefits from the De Volta  para Casa programme, while being monitored by  community-based mental health services (523). Importantly, just as levels of dependency  among people living with mental health  conditions differ, so too do the levels of support  provided through supported living services. Sometimes all people need is the physical infrastructure to live independently – either on their  own or with others in similar situations. But  sometimes people require additional layers of  support to help with health needs (including  mental health), drug and alcohol use, managing  benefits and debt, developing daily living skills or  accessing education, training and employment.  Some countries use personal health budgets to  help ensure that the additional support provided  meets individual priorities. Personal health  budgets do not represent new money; rather they  are a different way of spending health funding to  meet the needs of an individual. They can be used  for a selection of things such as therapies, personal  care or equipment. An evaluation of personal  health budgets in the United Kingdom found that  they significantly improve people’s quality of  life and well-being and are cost–effective (524). The range of residential services needed and  feasible in any given area will depend on what  other resources and services are available locally,  and on diverse sociocultural factors, such as how  much family care is usually given. This means that  supported housing schemes should consider a mix  of facilities that may include, among other things: •	 social housing, with priority access reserved for  people living with mental health conditions; •	 hostels that offer short-stay accommodation  with supervision; •	 rehabilitation centres that offer short-term  stays, with group or individual therapy; •	 residential care homes offering clinical and  social support; and •	 group homes where people with varying needs  and abilities live together and offer each other  peer support. Rent in group homes is usually  subsidized and residents are usually also  supported by a multidisciplinary team of health  and social workers (see Box 7.21 Home Again:  group homes for women in India). In all cases, to avoid (re-)creating institutional  environments (known as transinstitutionalization),  any supported housing facilities that are  established should be small in scale, sufficiently  resourced, and well-monitored (488). They should  promote independent living and respect people’s  rights, including the right to choose where and  with whom to live (525, 526). 236 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

NARRATIVE A society that embraces well-being  fully works better Alejandra’s experience I have lived a life of emotional instability and wrong  decisions. At age 39 I got a schizoaffective disorder, but  I only recently received effective treatment (at 44 years  of age). During my hospitalization, my father died and  I was abandoned in the hospital. I agreed to go to a  protected home (hogar protegido) to get support and  so reinsert myself in society in a productive way. The protected home is part of a social inclusion project  for people with mental disorders. In each home,  there is a trained member of staff who supports us  in our personal development and practical needs,  and together we form a family, which gives us  encouragement and confidence. For me, the home  provided a base of support and emotional security on  which to rebuild my life healthily. It is encouraging to  get support like this, and it gives me a lot of hope for  personal fulfillment, and confidence in life. Now I am  working while I still live in a protected home. I believe that disseminating information on mental  health is very important. Information gives us the  power to generate change. It helps raise awareness  in society to prevent mental health conditions or  identify them early, and to create empathy and social  inclusion. Information makes us freer – a human  aspiration. And it helps guarantee individual rights to  information, health, and a decent job and life. It has been difficult for me to get work, but starting  over takes time. Mental disorders are not isolated  problems, or a consequence of some specific family  dynamics. They are social problems that involve us  all as a community. United we are stronger. Investing  in mental health is betting on the future because a  society that embraces well-being fully works better. Mental health is our treasure, our identity, what  makes us unique. Alejandra Rivera, Peru 237 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

CASE STUDY BOX 7.21 Home Again: group homes for women in India Home Again is a housing intervention with supportive  services for homeless women in India living with  long-term mental health conditions. Run by nongovernmental organizations The Banyan,  Home Again provides shared housing in urban and  rural spaces where four to five women live together  in home-like environments, with a mix of work,  leisure and social activities that are facilitated by a  multidisciplinary team of service providers. Each  house is also home to a community worker trained to  provide basic psychosocial and medical care. In 2019, 245 women received support through  50 houses in the states of Tamil Nadu, Kerala  and Maharashtra. Home Again has been shown to improve community  functioning, reduce social distancing between  women living with mental health conditions and  other community members, increase participation  in the workforce and reinforce experiences of hope  and interdependence. Source: WHO, [PHONE_REDACTED]. Traditionally, supported housing schemes  for homeless people with mental health  conditions adopted a treatment first approach  in which people had to be treated and sober  before being housed; or had to prove their  ability to live independently by graduating  through different housing services before  accessing permanent accommodation. But since the early 1990s, especially in  high-income countries, these traditional models  have given way to a rapid re-housing approach  known as “housing first”, which gives people  experiencing chronic homelessness with  co-occurring mental health conditions immediate  access to stable and affordable housing without  prerequisites; and couples it with flexible  support services tailored to individual needs  (528). In all cases, the housing first approach is  designed to provide choice and control, giving  rights and responsibilities back to people  who may have been repeatedly excluded. There is evidence that a housing first approach  improves housing stability and reduces  homelessness and hospitalization (529). There  is also evidence to suggest that it reduces the  use of responsive services for emergency health,  emergency shelter and criminal justice (530). 238 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

7.4 Mental health services beyond the  health sector As emphasized throughout this report, health  care alone is often not enough to meet all  the needs of people living with mental health  conditions, especially those living in poverty  or without housing, education or the means  to generate an income. This means that other  sectors have a key role in complementing any  mental health services provided by health sector.  So too do a wide range of community providers  (for example, volunteers, women’s groups  and traditional midwives) that may provide  psychosocial supports (see section 7.1.2 A mix of  services and supports: Beyond formal services). Transforming mental health services means  taking a multisectoral approach by embedding  services for people with mental health  conditions into the policies and programmes  of all relevant sectors, including livelihoods  support, housing, education, vocational training,  employment, social welfare, and legal support.  A whole-of-government approach is needed. In practice, formal mental health services beyond the  health sector can be divided into two broad types. •	 Clinical care services are delivered in non-health  settings, including schools, prisons and  women’s shelters. •	 Social services provide support to people living  with mental health conditions to ensure inclusion  and fulfil basic needs, including social housing,  education, employment and social benefits. 7.4.1 Mental health care in  non-health settings  Mental health activities in non-health settings  are largely focused on mental health promotion  and prevention activities (see Chapter 6  Promotion and prevention for change). But  in some cases, mental health services may  include services to identify and provide basic  treatment for mental health conditions. Early detection and intervention  in schools Schools offer a strong platform for early  identification and treatment of mental health  conditions in children and adolescents because  they operate where most school-going children  are, have access to families, are free at point  of use and overcome typical access barriers  such as inconvenient location, costly transport  and stigma. There is much impetus for the  educational system to offer this platform as there  is strong evidence that investing in mental health  improves educational outcomes (531, 532). Mental health should be part  of school health services. The potential role of schools in safeguarding  student health and wellbeing is well-recognized  in WHO’s Global School Health Initiative  and in WHO and UNICEF’s HAT initiative  (see section 6.3.2 Protecting and promoting  child and adolescent mental health). WHO’s recent guidelines for school health services  state mental health should be part of school health  services (533). The guidelines recommend that  school health services should be capable of early  identification for referral and support for a range  of mental health conditions as well as for stress.  The guidelines also recommend that the services  conduct crisis counselling and counselling for  substance use; and that school health services  support policies on bullying and health promotion. 239 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

CASE STUDY BOX 7.22 REACH: community-based partnerships to improve youth mental health Since 2007, the Response, Early Intervention and  Assessment in Community Mental Health (REACH)  initiative in Singapore has provided front-line  support to students with mental health conditions  by establishing regional multidisciplinary and  intersectoral networks of care. School counsellors are trained to identify emotional,  social and behavioural issues and refer students  to a mobile case management team of REACH  clinicians for assessment and intervention. REACH  teams comprise a mix of doctors, psychologists,  medical social workers, occupational therapists and  psychiatric nurses. Although mobile, the teams are  based in a regional hospital to ensure a continuum of  care in case further specialist services are needed.  Between 2007 and 2015, school counsellors referred  more than 4 000 students to REACH teams. REACH continuously builds clinical competencies  among the hospital-based teams, through regular  supervision and trainings on evidence-based  interventions. The initiative also works to increase  knowledge and clinical capacity within the  community, through targeted training and outreach  activities around youth mental health issues. School professionals, social service organizations  and others are trained on specific mental health  conditions and intervention techniques (including  for depression, suicide and gaming); and on how to  support youths whose caregivers are experiencing  mental health issues. Source: Lim et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. School-based counselling can be used as  a preventive intervention for children with  emerging signs of mental health conditions; for  assessment purposes; as an early intervention;  or as parallel support alongside specialist mental  health services. All counselling aims to provide  young people with an opportunity to discuss their  difficulties in a supportive environment and to  find their own ways of addressing their issues.  Counselling may include family or group work.  School-based counsellors may also link children  and their families with social and specialist  services (see Box 7.22 REACH: community-based  partnerships to improve youth mental health). Mental health care in the justice system Prisoners are much more likely to have a  mental health condition than the general  population. Before incarceration, they are more  likely to have been exposed to adverse social  circumstances that are risk factors for mental  health conditions as well as for crime. And once  in prison, people may be subjected to social  isolation, poor living conditions, physical or sexual  assault or psychological abuse, which further  elevate the risk of mental health conditions.  Around 70% of the world’s prison population  – more than seven million people – are based  240 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

in LMICs, where most people in the world live.  Researchers estimate the rates of non-affective  psychosis and depression among these prisoners  are 6.2% and 16.0% respectively, which is  respectively 16 and 6 times higher than the rates  among the general population (535). Adolescents  in the juvenile justice system are similarly  much more likely to experience mental health  conditions than those in the general population,  with an estimated 70% having at least one  diagnosable mental health condition (536). Prisoners are much less likely to  have their mental health needs  recognized and to receive the  care and support they need. Even though severe mental health conditions are  much more prevalent in prisons, prisoners are  much less likely to have their mental health needs  recognized and to receive the care and support  they need. In some low-income countries, where  mental health services are particularly lacking,  prisons can end up being used as a place where  people who are deemed to be out of control due  to acute mania or psychosis are brought and held  without trial, often in horrific living conditions  (537). In many countries, people that could easily  be diverted into mental health care are tried  and imprisoned, even for very minor crimes. People who were tried for a crime and found  not guilty because they have a mental health  condition often suffer human rights violations.  In some jurisdictions, these people are kept in  prisons without adequate care and support, while  in others they may be transferred to a forensic  psychiatric hospital (or section) where they  are often treated like prisoners, with severely  restricted freedoms. Discharge is often difficult  or erratic and people are often kept for far longer  than any sentence they may have received for  the criminal act they were accused of (538). In all countries, trying to navigate the  criminal justice system with a mental health  condition can be extremely difficult and  distressing (read Laura’s experience). Addressing mental health needs in the  criminal justice system benefits prisoners,  prison employees and the wider community.  It can be achieved in multiple ways,  depending on local needs and contexts. For example, in some high-income countries,  liaison and diversion services, or street triage  services have been developed to identify people  with possible mental health conditions when they  first come into contact with the criminal justice  system. These services are then used to support  people through early stages of the criminal system,  refer them for appropriate health or social care,  or divert them away from the criminal justice  system towards more appropriate settings. Other proposed strategies for improving mental  health care in the criminal justice system include  integrating mental health into general health  services available to all prisoners. An example  might be implementing the mhGAP programme  with supportive supervision by mental health  professionals (539). Training employees at all levels  of the criminal justice system on mental health  issues can also help raise awareness, challenge  stigmatizing attitudes, and encourage mental  health promotion for both staff and prisoners. 7.4.2 Key social services Social services need to be part of action  to transform mental health. People with severe and chronic mental health  conditions are often excluded from social  and economic opportunities such as child  protection, housing, employment, education  and state benefits. This puts additional  burdens on families and communities and  impedes rehabilitation and recovery. Complementing health interventions with key social  241 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

NARRATIVE Navigating the criminal justice  system with a mental health  condition Laura’s experience In the Spring of 2015, there were eight warrants out  for my arrest. My crimes were misdemeanours, and  several warrants were compounded charges resulting  from a failure to appear in court. I was petrified to go  to court alone and equally scared to not show up. I  could barely keep the time of day. Eventually I was  hospitalized. On discharge, I returned to a shelter and  began to get help. I retained an attorney. I went to court. I paid fines.  This could easily have broken me were it not for the  help and support of friends and family. At my final  court hearing, I found out I might spend six months  in jail – for stealing a grilled cheese sandwich from a  hospital cafeteria while homeless. This was the most  frightening experience. The fear I experienced navigating the system while  mentally unwell impeded my recovery and re-entry  into the community. Nights spent homeless, fending for  food and safety, created a devastating cycle of despair. My journey is not uncommon among people like  myself with behavioural health conditions. Too often  we are found in the grips of the criminal legal system  for infractions that could be considered minor. This  can cause great pain to ourselves, our families and  friends; and has long-term impacts on our ability to  rent housing or get employment. Today I struggle to understand what happened and  why. Is taking a sandwich the result of hunger or  mental illness? Some people call my crimes “homeless  crimes.” I’d agree they are borne out of this experience,  but I was also unwell: there is a fine line between  homelessness and mental illness. I am now no longer on probation and I’ve successfully  completed 80 hours of community service. I feel like a  weight has been lifted. Instead of worrying about legal  issues I am working to change behavioural health care  policy in coalition with others. The fresh start feels  good, and I am hopeful. Laura Van Tosh, United States of America 242 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

services can enable people with mental health  conditions to achieve their recovery goals and live  a more satisfying and meaningful life. On paper, the  responsibility for providing these social services  lies beyond the health sector. But in practice the  division between mental health and social services  is blurred. Supported living services, for example,  may be run by authorities or nongovernmental  organizations in the health or social sector. Complementing health care with  social services enables people  with mental health conditions  achieve their recovery goals. Many other public and private community mental  health services that are discussed above, in section  7.3 Community mental health services, also  support access to key social services. Community  mental health centres and teams in particular  often work with community partners to provide  social support and facilitate access to social  benefits. Like clubhouses and other psychosocial  rehabilitation organizations, they may also offer  supported employment and education schemes. As argued throughout this report, addressing  social problems is part and parcel of transforming  mental health. In terms of service uptake, social  care sometimes needs to be provided as a first  step of mental health care. For example, depressed  survivors of ongoing intimate partner violence  will often urgently need safe accommodation,  financial aid, identity papers and livelihood  and legal support, among other things (540). Addressing the social needs of people  with mental health conditions is especially  important in emergency settings, where they  are especially vulnerable to risks such as abuse  and neglect and require priority access to  protection, social support and clinical care. International guidelines on MHPSS emphasize  the need to link services for people with mental  health conditions in humanitarian settings with  other community-based supports (541, 542). These  include programmes for shelter, food, water and  sanitation, education as well as specific support  for survivors of sexual and gender-based violence. Child protection Exposure to adversity during childhood is a major  risk factor for mental health conditions (see section  2.2.2 Risks undermine mental health), as well as  a wide range of other health and social issues.  An effective child protection system is critical to  prevent and respond to all forms of violence against  children, including exploitation, abuse and neglect. Effective child protection requires a comprehensive,  multistakeholder approach that can tackle the root  causes of violence and abuse. WHO and partners  advocate a seven-pronged strategy (INSPIRE),  which includes not only preventive measures for  all children but also response and support services  for both victims and juvenile offenders (337). Basic health services, such as emergency medical  care for violence-related injuries and clinical  care for victims of sexual violence, must be in  place and guidance on clinical care for victims of  sexual violence should be applied. Psychological  counselling to victims and perpetrators may  break the cycle of violence and help them better  cope with and recover from any mental health  consequences. The range of services and supports  to be considered includes: linking identification of  child maltreatment to access to mental health care  and psychosocial supports; case management;  psychological counselling based on cognitive  behavioural therapy; specific programmes for  juvenile offenders; and foster care as needed (337). In many countries – especially during humanitarian emergencies – child protection stakeholders  are proactive in mental health and psychosocial  support. Good coordination and collaboration  between people working in health and child  protection is essential to ensure coherent care. 243 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

Education and training Adults with severe mental health conditions  may struggle to access adult learning and  vocational training opportunities either because  of the demands of the education or because of  discrimination. Similarly, children and adolescents  with severe mental health conditions are often  excluded from mainstream education, and may  be segregated into separate schools or classrooms  or, sometimes, not given any schooling at all.  Mainstream education’s generally inflexible  teaching systems and structures mean that even if  children with severe mental health conditions are  allowed to go to school, they are more likely to fail,  have to repeat a year or drop out early (543, 544). Inclusive education means providing meaningful  learning opportunities to all learners, including  those with mental health conditions, without  discrimination. Specifically, it means: supporting  all learners in the same schools and classrooms;  eliminating any communication, information  and attitude barriers from schools; ensuring  that learning resources are accessible to all; and  ensuring all educators and administrators foster  inclusion. Key strategies for inclusive education  include employing specially trained staff or  adopting flexible curricula, different teaching  methods and alternative educational resources.  Peer support or mentoring services can also be  valuable in supporting inclusive education as a  source of emotional support and practical advice. For adult learners, supported education  programmes are designed to help people with  mental health conditions identify their learning  goals and enter and navigate an education  programme to meet those goals. Supported  education programmes come in different shapes  and sizes but often include staff dedicated  to supporting people with mental health  conditions, one-to-one and group skill-building  activities, practical help to navigate the academic  setting and local community, and opportunities for mental health counselling (545). In rural areas, providing people with mental health  conditions with basic agricultural skills can mean  that they become productive members of their  community, and their involvement in work and their  contributions to the household also reduce stigma. Employment As with education, people with severe mental  health conditions are often discriminated against  in the world of employment. They are more likely  to be unemployed or underpaid than the general  population (546), yet access to paid work is often  important for recovery. It not only gives people  a livelihood but can also improve their quality  of life by adding daily structure and a sense of  purpose and achievement. For employers, there  are benefits too, as mental health care is associated  with improved occupational outcomes (218). Supported employment is more  effective than vocational training in  helping people with mental health  conditions access paid work. There are many ways that people with mental  health conditions can be supported to gain  access to a livelihood. Encouraging businesses  to adopt inclusive recruitment and employment  policies and practices is important and, like  inclusive education, requires employers to provide  support that is tailored to an individual’s needs. There are several models for helping people  with mental health conditions gain and sustain  competitive employment. One tried and tested  model is supported employment, where people  with mental health conditions are supported  to learn on the job, usually by social services  or psychosocial rehabilitation programmes  (see section 7.3 Community mental health  services). Like housing first approaches, which  prioritize access to housing over ensuring people  are housing-ready, supported employment  prioritizes access to employment and then  provides training and support once the person  244 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

CASE STUDY is in place. Supported employment has been  found to be more effective than vocational  training in helping people with severe mental  health conditions to access paid work (547). Another model of support is transitional  employment, where people with mental health  conditions are given professional experience  through time-limited work placements. These  can provide important stepping-stones to  longer-term employment afterwards. They may  also be run by social services or as part of broader  intersectoral recovery-based interventions  within community mental health services (see  section 7.3.3 Psychosocial rehabilitation). Other intersectoral interventions to improve  access to employment for people with mental  health conditions emphasize the opportunities  available through entrepreneurism. Interventions  may include establishing social enterprises and  livelihood programmes (see Box 7.23 Nurturing  entrepreneurs with mental health conditions). In addition to supporting access to work, it is  also important to ensure that working conditions  are safe and supportive of mental health  for all workers, including those with mental  health conditions (see section 6.3.3 Promoting  and protecting mental health at work). BOX 7.23 Nurturing entrepreneurs with mental health conditions Community Recovery Achieved Through  Entrepreneurism (CREATE), Kenya CREATE couples social business with psychosocial  rehabilitation and peer support to help people living  with severe mental health conditions into paid work.  The project, which was implemented over 18 months  in peri-urban Kenya, established a full-service print  shop called Point Tech Solutions and employed  seven people with severe mental health conditions to  help run it. Employees reported a number of benefits  from the experience, including improved well-being  and self-identity, greater productivity and financial  independence, better employment and social skills  and greater connectedness with their families and  the larger community. Family members also reported  feeling a reduced sense of burden as carers. BasicNeeds, Ghana BasicNeeds is an international nongovernmental  organizations dedicated to mental health and  development, with operations in a range of LMICs. It  combines clinical, social and economic approaches  to support the multiple needs of people living  with mental health conditions. For example, while  providing accessible treatment, BasicNeeds helps  individuals and their families and carers develop  self-help groups to enable mutual support and joint  activities. In Ghana, the BasicNeeds self-help groups  focus on employment and economic empowerment.  They operate revolving funds based on voluntary  contributions, which they use to provide access  to credit for people with severe mental health  conditions. First loans are interest free. Not all loans  are paid back; and some are used simply to cover  the costs of emergency care; but many are used to  support livelihood activities. Sources: Grand Challenges Canada, [PHONE_REDACTED]; Cohen et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. 245 Chapter 7 Restructuring and scaling up care for impact

Social benefits Access to social benefits – including for maternity,  work injury, disabilities, unemployment and  pensions – can be a lifeline for people with mental  health conditions in times of hardship, and can  be critical for recovery (550). Yet these people are  often excluded from social benefits by complex  application processes and eligibility assessments or  because they work in the informal economy (551). There are many ways to improve access to state  benefits for people with mental health conditions.  Benefit systems can be adjusted so that they are  more accessible, for example by offering a wider  range of communication channels and entry  points, by providing targeted support during  application, and by simplifying reassessment  processes (552). Training assessors on mental  health conditions and associated social problems  may also help improve the assessment processes.  Some experts recommend introducing an unconditional component to social benefits, backed  by evidence that such payments can reduce  psychiatric symptoms and improve claimants’  quality of life (553). While not explicitly designed to improve mental  health, there is growing evidence that cash transfer  programmes (conditional and unconditional) can  significantly benefit people living with mental  health conditions, especially in LMICs (see Fig. 7.[PHONE_REDACTED], 555). By increasing household income  and economic security, cash transfers may also  reduce family conflict associated with financial  stress and so reduce domestic violence and  mental health risks for all family members (556). FIG. 7.5 Examples of how social benefits from around the world can promote and protect  mental health  Sources: a Fernald et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; b Webber et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; c Ljungqvist et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; d Oliveira Alves et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; e Angeles et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; f Kilburn et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]; g Powell-Jackson et al, [PHONE_REDACTED]. NON-CONTRIBUTORY  PENSIONS MEXICO a Signifcant positive  impact on symptoms in older adults PERSONAL HEALTH  BUDGET ENGLAND b Positive outcomes for  people’s choice, control  and quality of life UNCONDITIONAL CASH  TRANSFERS SWEDEN c Significantly better  perceived quality of life  and social networks Reduced suicide rates Reduced symptoms of  depression in youth,  especially girls Reduced prevalence of  depressive symptoms  among young men Reduction in measures  of maternal depression CONDITIONAL CASH  TRANSFERS BRAZIL d UNCONDITIONAL CASH  TRANSFERS MALAWI e UNCONDITIONAL CASH  TRANSFERS KENYA f CASH GRANTS TO NEW  MOTHERS INDIA g 246 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

8 Conclusion

Mental health is critically important for  everyone, everywhere. It is an inherent and vital  part of our overall health and well-being and  affects our lives in many ways (see Chapter 2  Principles and drivers in public mental health).  Our mental health enables us to function and  thrive as individuals, family members and  community participants. It helps us cope with  stress and adapt to change. It allows us to  build healthy relationships and connect with  others. And it supports us to learn well and  work productively. Mental health and access to  mental health care are a basic human right. For decades, mental health has been one of  the most neglected areas of public health  globally. Undervalued and misunderstood,  it receives a tiny part of the attention and  resources it needs and deserves. The result  is that for too many people, achieving and  maintaining good mental health is a challenge. All over the world, people suffer because of poor  mental health. And health and social systems  are ill-equipped to help (see Chapter 3 World  mental health today). Ongoing crises around  the world increasingly justify prioritizing mental  health. But even before the COVID-19 pandemic,  which has affected the mental health of so  many, close to a billion people were estimated  to have a mental disorder. Just a small fraction  of these people in need have access to effective,  affordable and quality care. Stigma, discrimination  and human rights violations against people  with mental health conditions are widespread  in communities and care systems everywhere.  And in all countries, it is the poorest and most  disadvantaged in society who are at greater  risk of mental ill-health and who are also the  least likely to receive adequate services. 8.1 Comprehensive action This report argues for a worldwide transformation towards better mental health for all.  The need for change has long been recognized.  And the benefits of change are clear: reduced  suffering and improved public health, stronger  protection of human rights and better social and  economic outcomes (see Chapter 4 Benefits of  change). Investing to transform mental health  means investing in a better life and future for all. The vision is a world where mental health is  valued, promoted and protected. It is a world  where mental health conditions are prevented  and where anyone and everyone can exercise  their full range of human rights and access the  high quality, timely and culturally appropriate  health and social care they need and deserve.  And it is a world where everyone has the  chance to achieve the highest possible level  of health and to participate fully in society  free from stigma and discrimination. The WHO Comprehensive mental health action  plan (2013–2030) commits all countries to try  and make that vision a reality. As its name  suggests, it also provides a blueprint for action,  making recommendations for countries, WHO  and partners around four key objectives: 1.	stronger effective leadership and governance; 2.	comprehensive, integrated and responsive  community-based care; 3.	strategies for promotion and prevention; and 4.	stronger information systems, evidence  and research. 248 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

Importantly, the plan includes a wide  range of implementation options for  realizing each objective, recognizing that  their relevance to different countries will  depend on national circumstances. In 2019, WHO Member States reaffirmed  their commitment to the plan’s original four  objectives and extended the timeline for  achieving them to 2030 (from 2020). In 2021  they endorsed an updated set of targets and  implementation options to reflect learnings from  research and practice over the past decade. Some countries have successfully translated  the commitments agreed in the action plan  and other global or regional instruments  into their own national strategies for mental  health. But in most cases there remain  huge implementation gaps and needs. For each country, identifying which actions  to prioritize is key. No country is expected to  fulfil every implementation option in the global  action plan. And many countries do not have the  resources to implement every action described  in this report. But every country has ample  opportunities to make meaningful progress  towards better mental health for its population.  Whether developing rights-aligned mental health  policies and laws, covering mental health in health  care benefit packages and insurance schemes,  effectively integrating mental health into primary  health care practice and emergency preparedness  and response, or implementing suicide prevention  measures, the many examples in this report show  that strategic changes can make a big difference. No country is expected to fulfil  every implementation option in  the global action plan. But every  country can make meaningful  progress towards better mental  health for its population. Choosing what to focus on first will depend on  country contexts, local mental health needs,  other priorities and the existing state and  structure of each mental health system. 8.2 Paths to transformation The evidence, experience and expertise  presented in this report point to three key  paths to transformation. These focus on  shifting attitudes to mental health, addressing  risks to mental health and strengthening  systems of care for mental health. First, we must deepen the value and  commitment we give to mental health as an  integral part of our own health and well-being,  as a basic human right and as a critical  contributor to public health, social well-being  and sustainable development. Second, we  must reshape environments that influence  mental health in ways that reduce risks and  strengthen protective factors so that everyone  has an equal opportunity to thrive and reach  the highest attainable level of mental health and  well-being. Third, we must strengthen mental  health care so that the full spectrum of mental  health need is met through a community-based  network of accessible, affordable and quality  services and supports (see Fig. 8.1). Each path to transformation is important in its  own right and each one can contribute to specific  mental health goals and priorities. But they are  also deeply connected and mutually reinforcing.  249 Chapter 8 Conclusion

FIG. 8.1 Three transformative paths towards better mental health  Build community-based networks of services Move away from custodial care in psychiatric hospitals Diversify and scale up care options Make mental health aﬀordable  and accessible for all Promote person-centred, human rights-based care Engage and empower people with lived experience STRENGTHEN MENTAL HEALTH CARE PATHS TO TRANSFORMATION Understand and appreciate intrinsic value Promote social inclusion of  people with mental health  conditions Give mental and physical health equal priority Intensify engagement across sectors Step up investment in mental health DEEPEN VALUE AND COMMITMENT Reshape physical, social and economic characteristics of diﬀerent environments for mental health, including homes schools workplaces health care services communities natural environments RESHAPE ENVIRONMENTS 250 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

8.2.1 Deepen value and  commitment Transforming mental health is about deepening  the value we give to mental health as individuals,  communities and governments; and matching  that value with commitment, engagement and  investment by all stakeholders, across all sectors. To deepen value and commitment to  mental health means, for example, to: •	 Understand and appreciate the intrinsic value  of mental health and put time and effort into  taking care of one’s own mental health as well  as supporting the mental health of others. •	 Include people with mental health conditions  in all aspects of society and decision-making to  overcome stigma and discrimination, reduce  disparities and promote social justice. •	 Give mental health the same value and  priority as physical health, including through  enhanced social and financial protection  measures, equitable access to quality services,  equal access to education and employment  opportunities for people with mental health  conditions, and increased research support. •	 Intensify engagement with mental health  across sectors, understanding its value as a  basic human right and a critical contributor  to public health, social well-being and  economic development, and supporting  a whole-of-government and all-of-society  approach to improving mental health. •	 Step up investments in mental health, not  just by securing appropriate funds and human  resources across health and other sectors to  meet mental health needs, but also through  committed leadership, pursuing evidence-based  policies and practice, and establishing robust  information and monitoring systems. 8.2.2 Reshape environments  for better mental health Transforming mental health is about reshaping  the physical, social and economic characteristics  of our environments to better protect mental  health and prevent mental health conditions.  This includes reshaping both our immediate  surroundings and the broader conditions of  daily life, as well as structural threats such as  social and economic inequalities, conflict, public  health emergencies and the climate crisis. For  people with mental health conditions, reshaping  environments also means ensuring equal  opportunities to live, learn, work and play. At heart, reshaping environments for better  mental health is about understanding the  social and structural determinants of mental  health and intervening in ways that reduce  risks, build resilience and dismantle barriers  that stop people with mental health conditions  participating fully in society. This includes  integrating mental health promotion and  prevention within health and social services. It  also includes macro-level policies and strategic  actions (such as strengthening rules and  regulations or introducing adequate support  mechanisms) to tackle disadvantage, uphold  human rights and ensure fair and equal access to  infrastructure, services and opportunities for all. Reshaping environments is a truly multisectoral  venture. Most of the strategies and interventions required cannot be delivered by the health  sector alone. Yet the health sector has a major  role in enabling action by advocating, initiating  and, where appropriate, facilitating multisectoral  collaboration and coordination for mental health. 251 Chapter 8 Conclusion

Key environments where action can be taken  to reduce risks and build resilience are: •	 Homes, where priority actions include:  eliminating intimate partner violence,  preventing abuse and neglect of children and  older people; enabling nurturing care for early  childhood development; as well as protecting  against household hardship through, for  example, poverty alleviation programmes  and livelihood support for people with mental  health conditions. •	 Communities, where strategies may include  specific initiatives to improve social interactions,  stop discrimination, strengthen safety and tackle  negative social norms and practices. •	 Schools, where priority interventions include  social and emotional learning programmes  as well as initiatives to counter bullying,  discrimination and violence. •	 Workplaces, where action is needed both to  secure safe, supportive and decent working  conditions for all; and to support people with  mental health conditions to gain competitive  employment or return to work after absence. •	 Health care services, where action to shift  attitudes and strengthen rights is important  to offer supportive care, and eliminate  coercion and abuse of people with mental  health conditions. •	 Natural environments, where strategies are  needed to address the climate crisis, increase  access to green spaces, and prevent exposure to  toxic pollutants. 8.2.3 Strengthen mental  health care Transforming mental health care is about changing  where, how, and by whom mental health care is  delivered and received. It is about restructuring  mental health services to shift the locus of care  for severe mental health conditions away from  psychiatric hospitals towards communities, while  simultaneously scaling up the availability of care  for common conditions. And it is about shifting  from fragmented services, which currently only  meet a small proportion of people’s needs, to  coordinated services that cater to everyone. To change mental health care means,  among other things, to: •	 Build community-based networks of  interconnected services that cover the full  spectrum of biopsychosocial care and support  for all mental health conditions. Comprehensive  networks include: mental health services  that are integrated in general health care;  community mental health services; and services  beyond the health sector. •	 Move away from custodial care in psychiatric  hospitals as community-based services  become available by simultaneously improving  quality of all inpatient and residential  care, shortening stays and preventing new  admissions to long-stay psychiatric hospitals  and increasing discharges of long-term  residents, and closing long-stay psychiatric  institutions once there are adequate  community alternatives. This requires a  carefully planned participatory process that  prepares residents for life in the community  and that follows up on them after discharge. •	 Diversify and scale up care options for common  mental health conditions such as depression and  anxiety. This includes adopting a task-sharing  approach that expands the evidence-based  care offered by general health workers and  community providers. It also includes using  digital technologies to support guided and  unguided self-help and to deliver remote care. •	 Make mental health care accessible and  affordable for all by explicitly including  mental health interventions in UHC basic  packages of essential services and financial  protection schemes. Everyone in society, no  matter their age or where they live, should  252 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

get the mental health care they need without  suffering financial hardship, social exclusion or  coercive forms of treatment. •	 Deliver person-centred, human rights-based  care by moving away from models of care that  focus exclusively on clinical pathologies and  symptomatic outcomes, towards ones that also  respect and embrace a person’s rights, needs,  perspectives and priorities. •	 Involve people with lived experience  by empowering individuals in their own  mental health care, engaging people with  lived experience in local services planning,  delivery and evaluation in meaningful ways,  and ensuring they participate actively in  policy-making and research. Each path to transformation is a path towards  better mental health for all. Together, the  paths lead us closer to the world envisaged by  the Comprehensive mental health action plan  2013–2030, where mental health is valued,  promoted and protected; where everyone has an  equal opportunity to thrive and to exercise their  human rights; and where everyone can access  the mental health care they need (see Fig. 8.2). 253 Chapter 8 Conclusion

FIG. 8.2 Key shifts to transform mental health for all [PHONE_REDACTED]Limited value and attention to mental health Widespread  stigma and  discrimination  Services are underfunded and  underesourced Little acknowledgement of the  determinants of mental health Few and fragmented promotion and prevention programmes [PHONE_REDACTED]Predominantly  biomedical approach to care Care that ignores people’s own perspectives, priorities and human rights Mental health care  is only provided by the health sector Fragmented services with uneven access and coverage 10 11 Care centred on  psychiatric hospitals 12 Community providers and informal support for mental health are ignored  Mental health care not available  in primary health care [PHONE_REDACTED]Mental health is valued by all Equal participation in society free from discrimination  Services are appropriately budgeted and resourced across sectors Real and active multisectoral  collaboration on the  determinants of mental health Strategic and well-functioning promotion and prevention programmes [PHONE_REDACTED]A balanced, evidence-based  biopsychosocial approach  to care Person-centred, human rights-based,  recovery-oriented care  Mental health care is  embedded in services  across sectors Coordinated services with universal health coverage 10 11 Network of community-based  mental health services 12 Community providers and  informal support are  activated and strengthened  to support people  Mental health care integrated in  primary health care BEFORE AFTER 254 World mental health report: transforming mental health for all

8.3 Combining efforts for change No one should travel the paths to transformation  alone. It will take the combined efforts of all of us,  across all sectors, to transform mental health and  mental health care. Everyone has a part to play. Individuals can make a big difference by better  understanding and valuing mental health – both  their own and that of others – and taking action to  promote and protect it in daily life. This includes  various elements of self-care as well as individual  efforts to support, include and respect the rights of  people with mental health conditions in society. Governments have a key role in mobilizing,  shaping and supporting action. This includes  prioritizing mental health in health and  development agendas and developing laws  and policies to promote rights and improve  access to mental health care. Governments  can and should ensure that quality mental  health services are developed, resourced and  tailored to meet local mental health needs.  They should establish mechanisms for multisectoral engagement, take action to involve and  empower people with mental health conditions  in care and support and facilitate research and  training. And they should organize services to  expand coverage, and develop promotion and  prevention programmes that target the social  and structural determinants of mental health. Care providers, from family members and  community providers to general health workers  and mental health professionals, have a major  responsibility to deliver care that is respectful,  provides dignity, and supports autonomy.  Mental health professionals can and should  lead transformation in practice, advocating an  integrated approach to care and facilitating  new ways of working to achieve it, for example  task-sharing. Other health and social care  workers should also be active participants and  partners in transforming mental health care. For  example, they can improve their own and other  people’s knowledge and understanding of mental  health, or facilitate access to needed services. Nongovernmental organizations, academia,  employers and other civil society stakeholders  complement the efforts of governments and care  providers at every level. Civil society organizations  of all sizes, including local organizations of  persons with disabilities, have key roles. They  can, for example, join forces with and amplify  the voices of people with lived experience and  build public awareness and understanding of  mental health. All stakeholders should advocate  for the rights of people with mental health  conditions and support their inclusion in the  community. Academia should continue to  strengthen mental health science. Along with  other stakeholders, academics can demonstrate  what affordable, quality mental health care looks  like, and advocate for it in health and social  services. Depending on local circumstances,  nongovernmental organizations may play a  crucial part in training providers and in delivering  community-based mental health services and  supports, including in humanitarian settings. Our choices and commitments today shape  our opportunities tomorrow. By committing  to transform mental health, we choose to  end suffering, improve well-being and lift the  lives of everyone. All of us can help to make  change happen. 255

References 1 The world health report 2001. Mental health: new understanding, new  hope. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2001 (https://apps.who.int/ iris/handle/10665/42390, accessed 25 March 2022). 2 Expert Committee on Mental Health: report on the second session,  Geneva, 11–16 September 1950. Geneva: World Health Organization;  1951 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/37982, accessed 25  March 2022). 3 Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030. Geneva:  World Health Organization; 2021 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/345301, 25 March 2022). 4 The state of the world’s children 2021. On my mind: promoting,  protecting and caring for children’s mental health. Geneva: UNICEF;  2021 (https://www.unicef.org/reports/state-worlds-children-2021,  accessed 25 March 2022). 5 Mental health atlas 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/345946, accessed 25 March 2022). 6 Goldin I, Muggah R. COVID-19 is increasing multiple kinds of  inequality. Here’s what we can do about it. In: WEF [website].  Geneva: World Economic Forum; 2020 (https://www.weforum.org/ agenda/2020/10/covid-19-is-increasing-multiple-kinds-of-inequalityhere-s-what-we-can-do-about-it, accessed 25 March 2022). 7 Kola L, Kohrt BA, Hanlon C, Naslund JA, Sikander S, Balaji M, et al.  COVID-19 mental health impact and responses in low-income and  middle-income countries: reimagining global mental health. Lancet  Psychiatry. 2021;8(6):535–550. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 8 Prior K, Mills K, Ross J, Teesson M. Substance use disorders comorbid  with mood and anxiety disorders in the Australian general population.  Drug Alcohol Rev. 2017;36(3):317–324. doi:10.1111/dar.12419. 9 Epilepsy: a public health imperative. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2019 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/325293,  accessed 25 March 2022). 10 Hailemichael Y, Hailemariam D, Tirfessa K, Docrat S, Alem A,   Medhin G, et al. Catastrophic out-of-pocket payments for households of  people with severe mental disorder: a comparative study in rural Ethiopia.   Int J Ment Health Syst. 2019; 13(39). doi: 10.1186/s[PHONE_REDACTED]. 11 Investing in mental health: evidence for action. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2013 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/87232,  accessed 26 March 2022). 12 Global Health Data Exchange: Mental disorders; prevalence; 2019.  Seattle: Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluations; 2021 (http://ghdx. healthdata.org/gbd-results-tool?params=gbd-api-2019-permalink/0da 144dfff4afefddfaf45d[PHONE_REDACTED]c6, accessed 26 march 2022). 13 Ryan G, Qureshi O, Salaria N, Eaton J. Mental health and the  2030 Sustainable Development Agenda. London: London School of  Hygiene & Tropical Medicine; 2018 (https://www.mhinnovation.net/ sites/default/files/downloads/resource/UNGA%20brief%20final.pdf,  accessed 25 March 2022). 14 National Institute of Mental Health strategic plan. Washington  DC: National Institutes of Health; 2008 (https://www.hsdl. org/?view&did=755067, accessed 15 March 2022). 15 Patel V, Saxena S, Lund C, Thornicroft G, Baingana F, Bolton P, et  al. The Lancet Commission on global mental health and sustainable  development. Lancet. 2018;[PHONE_REDACTED]:1553–1598. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]X. 16 Tudor, K. Mental health promotion: paradigms and practice.   East Sussex: Routledge; 1996. 17 Herrman H, Patel V, Kieling C, Berk M, Buchweitz C, Cuijpers P, et  al. Time for united action on depression: a Lancet-World Psychiatric  Association Commission. Lancet. 2022;[PHONE_REDACTED]:957–1022. doi:  10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 18 Nurturing care for early childhood development: a framework for  helping children survive and thrive to transform health and human  potential. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2018 (https://apps.who. int/iris/handle/10665/272603, accessed 26 March 2022). 19 Borges G, Nock MK, Haro Abad JM, Hwang I, Sampson NA, Alonso J,  et al. Twelve-month prevalence of and risk factors for suicide attempts  in the World Health Organization World Mental Health Surveys. J Clin  Psychiatry. 2010;71(12):1617–1628. doi: 10.4088/JCP.08m04967blu. 20 Harvey SB, Modini M, Joyce S, Milligan-Saville JS, Tan L, Mykletun A,  et al. Can work make you mentally ill? A systematic meta-review of  work-related risk factors for common mental health problems. Occup  Environ Med. 2017;74(4):301–310. doi:10.1136/oemed-[PHONE_REDACTED]. 21 Yon Y, Mikton CR, Gassoumis ZD, Wilber KH. Elder abuse prevalence  in community settings: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet  Glob Health. 2017;5(2):e147–e156. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]X([PHONE_REDACTED]. 22 Drew N, Funk M, Tang S, Lamichhane J, Chávez E, Katontoka S, et  al. Human rights violations of people with mental and psychosocial  disabilities: an unresolved global crisis. Lancet. 2011;[PHONE_REDACTED]:1664– 1675. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]X. 23 Guidance on community mental health services: promoting  person-centred and rights-based approaches. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2021 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/341648,  accessed 26 March 2022). 24 Thornicroft G, Tansella M. Growing recognition of the importance  of service user involvement in mental health service planning and  evaluation. Epidemiol Psichiatr Soc. 2005;14(1):1–3. doi:10.1017/ s[PHONE_REDACTED]x[PHONE_REDACTED]. 25 Item A/HRC/44/48. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the right  of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of  physical and mental health. Human Rights Council; 2020 (http:// undocs.org/A/HRC/44/48, accessed 26 March 2022). 26 Marmot M, Friel S, Bell R, Houweling TAJ, Taylor S. Closing the gap in  a generation: health equity through action on the social determinants  of health. Lancet. 2008;[PHONE_REDACTED]:1661–1669. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 27 Risks to mental health: an overview of vulnerabilities and risk  factors. Background paper by WHO Secretariat for the development  of a comprehensive mental health action plan. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2012 (https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/risks-tomental-health, accessed 26 May 2022). 28 Ingram RE, Luxton DD. Vulnerability-stress models. In: Hankin BL,  Abela JRZ (editors). Development of psychopathology: a vulnerabilitystress perspective. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications; 2005.  doi:10.4135/[PHONE_REDACTED].n2. 29 Optimizing brain health across the life-course: WHO position  paper. Geneva: World Health Organization; in press. 30 Heilmann A, Mehay A, Watt RG, Kelly Y, Durrant JE, van Turnhout J,  et al. Physical punishment and child outcomes: a narrative review of  prospective studies. Lancet. 2021;[PHONE_REDACTED]:355–364. doi:10.1016/ S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 31 Global Burden of Disease 2019: Mental disorders – Level 2 cause.  Seattle: Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluations; 2021 (http://www. healthdata.org/results/gbd_summaries/2019/mental-disorders-level-2- cause, accessed 26 March 2022). 32 Frankl VE. Man’s search for meaning: an introduction to logotherapy.  Boston: Beacon Press; 1962. 33 Cuijpers P, Smit F, Furukawa TA. Most at-risk individuals will not  develop a mental disorder: the limited predictive strength of risk  factors. World Psychiatry. 2021;20(2):224–225. doi:10.1002/wps.20852. 34 Risks to mental health: an overview of vulnerabilities and risk  factors. Background paper by WHO Secretariat for the development  of a comprehensive mental health action plan. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2012 (https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/risks-tomental-health, accessed 26 May 2022).   35 Arango C, Dragioti E, Solmi M, Cortese S, Domschke K, Murray RM,  et al. Risk and protective factors for mental disorders beyond genetics:  an evidence-based atlas. World Psychiatry. 2021;20(3):417–436.  doi:10.1002/wps.20894. (https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/ risks-to-mental-health, accessed 26 May 2022). [PHONE_REDACTED]WHO and Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation. Social determinants of  mental health. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014 (https://apps. who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/112828/[PHONE_REDACTED]_eng.pdf,  accessed 26 March 2022). 37 Jones L, Bellis MA, Wood S, Hughes K, McCoy E, Eckley L, et al.  Prevalence and risk of violence against children with disabilities: a  systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. Lancet.  2012;[PHONE_REDACTED]:899–907. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 38 Hillis S, Mercy J, Amobi A, Kress H. Global prevalence of past-year  violence against children: a systematic review and minimum estimates.  Pediatrics. 2016;137(3):e[PHONE_REDACTED]. doi:10.1542/peds.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 39 Nelson CA, Scott RD, Bhutta ZA, Harris NB, Danese A,   Samara M. Adversity in childhood is linked to mental and physical  health throughout life. BMJ. 2020;371:m3048. doi:10.1136/bmj.m3048. 40 Hughes K, Bellis MA, Hardcastle KA, Sethi D, Butchart A,   Mikton C, et al. The effect of multiple adverse childhood experiences  on health: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Pub Health.  2017;2(8):e356–366. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 41 Dohrenwend BP. The role of adversity and stress in  psychopathology: some evidence and its implications for theory   and research. J Health Soc Behav. 2000;41(1): doi:10.2307/[PHONE_REDACTED].  42 Just societies: health equity and dignified lives. Report of the  Commission of the Pan American Health Organization on Equity  and Health Inequalities. Washington DC: Pan American Health  Organization; 2019 (https://iris.paho.org/handle/10665.2/51571,  accessed 26 March 2022). 43 Chen S, Oliva P, Zhang P. Air pollution and mental health: evidence  from China. Working paper 24686 Cambridge: National Bureau of  Economic Research; 2018 (http://www.nber.org/papers/w24686.  Accessed 26 March 2022). 44 Newbury JB, Stewart R, Fisher HL, Beevers S, Dajnak D,  Broadbent M, et al. Association between air pollution exposure and  mental health service use among individuals with first presentations  of psychotic and mood disorders: retrospective cohort study. Br J  Psychiatry. 2021;1–8. doi:10.1192/bjp.2021.119. 45 Kessler RC, Aguilar-Gaxiola S, Alonso J, Benjet C, Bromet EJ,   Cardoso G, et al. Trauma and PTSD in the WHO World Mental Health  Surveys. Eur J Psychotraumatol. 2017;8(sup5):[PHONE_REDACTED]. doi:10.1080/[PHONE_REDACTED].2017.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 46 Marmot M, Allen J, Goldblatt P, Herd E, Morrison J. Build back fairer:  the COVID-19 Marmot review. London: The Health Foundation; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://www.health.org.uk/publications/build-back-fairer-the-covid- 19-marmot-review, accessed 26 March 2022). 47 Priebe S, Matanov A, Schor R, Straßmayr C. Good practice in  mental health care for socially marginalised groups in Europe: a  qualitative study of expert views in 14 countries. BMC Public Health.  2012;12(1):248. doi: 10.1186/[PHONE_REDACTED]. 48 Plöderl M, Tremblay P. Mental health of sexual minorities.  A systematic review. Int Rev Psychiatry. 2015;27(5):1–19. doi:  10.3109/[PHONE_REDACTED].2015.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 49 Elliott I. Poverty and mental health. London: Mental Health  Foundation; 2016 (https://www.mentalhealth.org.uk/sites/default/files/ Poverty%20and%20Mental%20Health.pdf, accessed 26 March 2022). 50 De Silva M, Roland J. Mental health for sustainable development.  London: All-Party Parliamentary Groups on Global Health and Mental  Health; 2014 (https://www.mhinnovation.net/sites/default/files/ downloads/resource/APPG_Mental-Health_Web.pdf, accessed 26  March 2022). 51 Dybdahl R, Lien L. Mental health is an integral part of the sustainable  development goals. Prev Med Commun Health. 2017;1(1):1–3.  doi:10.15761/PMCH.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 52 Lund C, Brooke-Sumner C, Baingana F, Baron EC, Breuer E,   Chandra P, et al. Social determinants of mental disorders and the  Sustainable Development Goals: a systematic review of reviews.   Lancet Psychiatry. 2018;5(4):357–369. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 53 Marwaha S, Durrani A, Singh S. Employment outcomes in people  with bipolar disorder: a systematic review. Acta Psychiatr Scand.  2013;128:[PHONE_REDACTED]. doi: 10.1111/acps.12087. 54 Marwaha S, Johnson S. Schizophrenia and employment.   A review. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 2004;39:337–349.  doi: 10.1007/s[PHONE_REDACTED]. 55 Green and blue spaces and mental health: new evidence and  perspectives for action. Copenhagen: World Health Organization  Regional Office for Europe; 2021 (https://www.euro.who.int/en/ publications/abstracts/green-and-blue-spaces-and-mental-health-newevidence-and-perspectives-for-action-2021, accessed 26 March 2022).  56 Seedat S, Margaret Scott K, Angermeyer MC, Berglund P, Bromet EJ,  Brugha TS, et al. Cross-national associations between gender and  mental disorders in the World Health Organization World Mental  Health Surveys. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2009;66(7):785–795. doi:10.1001/ archgenpsychiatry.2009.36. 57 Chang S-S, Stuckler D, Yip P, Gunnel D. Impact of 2008 global  economic crisis on suicide: time trend study in 54 countries. BMJ.  2013;347:f5239. doi:10.1136/bmj.f5239. 58 Case A, Deaton A. Deaths of despair and the future of capitalism.  Princeton: Princeton University Press; 2020. 59 Van Bortel T, Basnayake A, Wurie F, Jambai M, Koroma AS,   Muana AT, et al. Psychosocial effects of an Ebola outbreak at individual,  community and international levels. Bull World Health Organ.  2016;94:210–214. doi:10.2471/BLT.15.158543. 60 WHO toolkit for the care and support of people affected by  complications associated with Zika virus. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2017 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/255718,  accessed 24 March 2022). 61 Neurology and COVID-19: scientific brief, 29 September 2021.  Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/345574, accessed 26 March 2022). 62 Mahler DG, Yonzan N, Lakner C, Aguilar RAC, Wu H. Updated  estimates of the impact of COVID-19 on global poverty: turning the  corner on the pandemic in 2021? World Bank Blogs. June [PHONE_REDACTED]https://blogs.worldbank.org/opendata/updated-estimates-impactcovid-19-global-poverty-turning-corner-pandemic-2021, accessed 3  March 2022). 63 Policy brief: COVID-19 and the need for action on mental health. New  York: United Nations; 2020 (https://unsdg.un.org/resources/policybrief-covid-19-and-need-action-mental-health, accessed 3 March 2022). 64 Public mental health and wellbeing and COVID-19. In: Local  Government Association [website]. London: Local Government  Association; 2022 (https://www.local.gov.uk/public-mental-health-andwellbeing-and-covid-19, accessed 3 March 2022). 65 Piquero AR, Jennings WG, Jemison E, Kaukinen C, Knaul FM.  Domestic violence during the COVID-19 pandemic – evidence from a  systematic review and meta-analysis. J Crim Justice. 2021;74:101806.  doi:10.1016/j.jcrimjus.2021.101806. 66 Managing the COVID-19 infodemic: promoting healthy behaviours  and mitigating the harm from misinformation and disinformation.  Joint statement by WHO, UN, UNICEF, UNDP, UNESCO, UNAIDS, ITU,  UN Global Pulse, and IFRC. 23 September 2020 (https://www.who.int/ news/item/[PHONE_REDACTED]managing-the-covid-19-infodemic-promotinghealthy-behaviours-and-mitigating-the-harm-from-misinformationand-disinformation, accessed 3 March 2022). 67 Mental health impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic in Scotland on  vulnerable groups. Glasgow: Mental Health Foundation; 2020 (https:// www.mentalhealth.org.uk/sites/default/files/MHF-Impact-Covid-19- Pandemic-Scot.pdf, accessed 3 March 2022). 68 COVID-19 Mental Disorders Collaborators. Global prevalence and  burden of depressive and anxiety disorders in 204 countries and  territories in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Lancet. 2021;S[PHONE_REDACTED]. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 69 Mental health and COVID-19: early evidence of the pandemic’s  impact: scientific brief, 2 March 2022. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2022 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/352189,  accessed 3 March 2022). 70 Action required to address the impacts of the COVID-19  pandemic on mental health and service delivery systems in the  WHO European Region. Copenhagen: World Health Organization  Regional office for Europe; 2021 (https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/ handle/10665/342932/WHO-EURO-[PHONE_REDACTED]eng.pdf,  accessed 3 March 2022). [PHONE_REDACTED]Third round of the global pulse survey on continuity of essential  health services during the COVID-19 pandemic: November–December  2021: interim report, 7 February 2022. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2022 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/351527,  accessed 4 March 2022). 72 The impact of COVID-19 on mental, neurological and substance  use services: results of a rapid assessment. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2020 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/335838,  accessed 4 March 2022). 73 EB148/20. Mental health preparedness and response for the  COVID-19 pandemic. Report by the Director-General. In: 148th session  of the WHO Executive Board. Geneva: World Health Organization; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/EB148/B148_20-en.pdf,  accessed 4 March 2022). 74 Mental health and psychosocial support. Resources for COVID-19.  In: IASC [website]. Geneva: Inter-Agency Standing Committee; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/mental-health-andpsychosocial-support-resources-covid-19, accessed 17 March 2022). 75 Mental health & COVID-19. In: WHO [website]. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2022 (https://www.who.int/teams/mental-health-andsubstance-use/mental-health-and-covid-19, accessed 17 March 2022). 76 Decision EB148(3). Promoting mental health preparedness and  response for public health emergencies. In: 148th session of the WHO  Executive Board: resolutions and decisions. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2021 (https://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/EB148/ B148_CONF5-en.pdf), acessed 26 May 2022. 77 Global humanitarian overview 2022. In: OCHA Services [website].  New York: UN Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://gho.unocha.org, accessed 26 March 2022). 78 Jones L, Asare JB, El Masri M, Mohanraj A, Sherief H, van Ommeren  M. Severe mental disorders in complex emergencies. Lancet.  2009;[PHONE_REDACTED]:654–661. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]Weissbecker I, Ventevogel P, Hanna F, Pathare S. Mental health  and psychosocial support in humanitarian settings: considerations  for protecting and promoting human rights. In: Rubin NS, Flores  RL (editors). The Cambridge handbook of psychology and  human rights. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2020.  doi:10.1017/[PHONE_REDACTED].026. 80 Mental health and psychosocial well-being among children in severe  food shortage situations. Geneva: World Health Organization. 2006 (https:// apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/332423, accessed 26 March [PHONE_REDACTED]Charlson F, van Ommeren M, Flaxman A, Cornett J, Whiteford  H, Saxena S. New WHO prevalence estimates of mental health  in conflict settings: a systematic review and analysis. Lancet.  2019;[PHONE_REDACTED]:240–248. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 82 Goldmann E, Galea S. Mental health consequences of disasters.  Annu Rev Public Health. 2014;35:169–183. doi:10.1146/annurevpublhealth-[PHONE_REDACTED]. 83 Refugee data finder. In: UNHCR: The UN Refugee Agency [website].  Geneva: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; 2022 (https:// www.unhcr.org/refugee-statistics/, accessed 26 March 2022). 84 Blackmore R, Boyle JA, Fazel M, Ranasinha S, Gray KM, Fitzgerald G,  et al. The prevalence of mental illness in refugees and asylum seekers: a  systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS Med. 2020;17(9):e[PHONE_REDACTED].  doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 85 Silove D, Ventevogel P, Rees S. The contemporary refugee  crisis: an overview of mental health challenges. World Psychiatry.  2017;16(2):130–139. doi:10.1002/wps.20438. 86 Hamber B, Gallagher E, Ventevogel P. Narrowing the gap between  psychosocial practice, peacebuilding and wider social change:  an introduction to the special section in this issue. Intervention  (Amstelveen). 2014;12(1):7–15. doi:10.1097/WTF.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 87 Costello A, Abbas M, Allen A, Ball S, Bell S, Bellamy R, et al.  Managing the health effects of climate change. Lancet Commissions.  2009;[PHONE_REDACTED]:1693–1733. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED].  88 Watts N, Amann M, Ayeb-Karlsson S, Belesova K, Bouley T, Boykoff M,  et al. The Lancet countdown on health and climate change: from 25  years of inaction to a global transformation for public health. Lancet.  2017;[PHONE_REDACTED]:581–630. doi:10.1016/s[PHONE_REDACTED]. 89 Augustinavicius JL, Lowe SR, Massazza A, Hayes K, Denckla C,  White RG, et al. Briefing paper: global climate change and trauma.  Chicago: International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://istss.org/public-resources/istss-briefing-papers/briefing-paperglobal-climate-change-and-trauma, accessed 26 March 2022).  90 Hayes K, Blashki G, Wiseman J, Burke S, Reifels L. Climate change  and mental health: risks, impacts and priority actions. Int J Ment Health  Syst. 2018;12:28. doi:10.1186/s[PHONE_REDACTED]. 91 Pourmotabbed A, Moradi S, Babaei A, Ghavami A, Mohammadi H,  Jalili C, et al. Food insecurity and mental health: a systematic review  and meta-analysis. Public health Nutrition. 2020;23(10):doi:10.1017/ S[PHONE_REDACTED]X. 92 Mental health and climate change: policy brief. Geneva: World  Health Organization; 2022 (https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/hand le/10665/354104/[PHONE_REDACTED]eng.pdf, accessed 11 May 2022).  93 Thompson R, Hornigold R, Page L, Waite T. Associations between  high ambient temperatures and heat waves with mental health  outcomes: a systematic review. Public health. 2018;161:171–191.  doi:10.1016/j.puhe.2018.06.[PHONE_REDACTED]Martin-Latry K, Goumy MP, Latry P, Gabinski C, Bégaud B, Faure I, et  al. Psychotropic drugs use and risk of heat-related hospitalisation. Eur  Psychiatry. 2007;22:335–338. doi:10.1016/j.eurpsy.2007.03.007. 95 Hayes K, Berry P, Ebi KL. Factors influencing the mental health  consequences of climate change in Canada. Int J Environ Res Public  Health. 2019;16(9):1583. doi:10.3390/ijerph[PHONE_REDACTED]. 96 GBD Results Tool. In: Global Health Data Exchange [website].  Seattle: Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation; 2019 (http://ghdx. healthdata.org/gbd-results-tool?params=gbd-api-2019-permalink/ cb9c37d9454c80df77adaed394d7fc0f, accessed 3 February 2022). 97 COVID-19 and the need for action on mental health. New York:  United Nations; 2020 (https://www.un.org/sites/un2.un.org/files/ un_policy_brief-covid_and_mental_health_final.pdf, accessed 25  March 2022). 98 GBD Results Tool. In: Global Health Data Exchange [website].  Seattle: Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation; 2019 (https://ghdx. healthdata.org/gbd-results-tool?params=gbd-api-2019-permalink/2537 ec0fb3bbbf9114a[PHONE_REDACTED]b, accessed 25 March 2022). 99 GBD Results Tool. In: Global Health Data Exchange [website].  Seattle: Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation; 2019 (http://ghdx. healthdata.org/gbd-results-tool?params=gbd-api-2019-permalink/[PHONE_REDACTED]dc958b095cb6ceb4bfd9c3e07, accessed 25 March 2022). 100 Global status report on alcohol and health 2018. Geneva:  World Health Organization; 2018 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/274603, accessed 25 March 2022). 101 World drug report 2021. New York: United Nations Office on Drugs  and Crime; 2021 (https://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/data-and-analysis/ wdr2021.html, accessed 25 March 2022). 102 Global status report on the public health response to dementia.  Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/344701, accessed 28 March 2022). 103 WHO methods and data sources for global burden of disease  estimates 2000–2019. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020 (https:// cdn.who.int/media/docs/default-source/gho-documents/globalhealth-estimates/ghe2019_daly-methods.pdf?sfvrsn=31b25009_7,  accessed 25 March 2022). 104 Barra M, Broqvist M, Gustavsson E, Henriksson M, Juth N,  Sandman L, et al. Severity as a priority setting criterion: setting a  challenging research agenda. Health Care Anal. 2020;28(1):25–44.  doi:10.1007/s[PHONE_REDACTED]z. 105 Woody CA, Ferrari AJ, Siskind DJ, Whiteford HA, Harris MG.  A systematic review and meta-regression of the prevalence and  incidence of perinatal depression. J Affect Disord. 2017;219:86–92.  doi:10.1016/j.jad.2017.05.003. 106 Oram S, Khalifeh H, Howard LM. Violence against women and  mental health. Lancet Psychiatry. 2017;4(2):159–170. doi:10.1016/ S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 107 Khalifeh H, Moran P, Borshmann R, Dean K, Hart C, Hogg J,  et al. Domestic and sexual violence against patients with severe  mental illness. Psychol Med. 2015;45(4):875–886. doi:10.1017/ S[PHONE_REDACTED]. [PHONE_REDACTED]Kessler R, Berglund P, Demler O, Jin R, Merikangas K. Lifetime  prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in  the National Comorbidity Survey replication. Arch Gen Psychiatry.  2005;62(6):593–602. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.62.6.593. 109 GBD Results Tool. In: Global Health Data Exchange [website].  Seattle: Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation; 2019 (https://ghdx. healthdata.org/gbd-results-tool?params=gbd-api-2019-permalink/ d1089abd9ea6072c2e[PHONE_REDACTED]b0c7960, accessed 30 March 2022). 110 GBD Results Tool. In: Global Health Data Exchange [website].  Seattle: Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation; 2019 (http://ghdx. healthdata.org/gbd-results-tool?params=gbd-api-2019-permalink/451c 9ab283c67271ec9a20c28b772f57, accessed 25 March 2022). 111 Kohrt BA, Rasmussen A, Kaiser BN, Haroz EE, Maharjan SM,  Mutamba BB, et al. Cultural concepts of distress and psychiatric  disorders: literature review and research recommendations for global  mental health epidemiology. Int J Epidemiol. 2014;43(2):365–406.  doi:10.1093/ije/dyt227. 112 GBD Results Tool. In: Global Health Data Exchange [website].  Seattle (http://ghdx.healthdata.org/gbd-results-tool?params=gbd-api- 2019-permalink/4131c[PHONE_REDACTED]bcd9caad1cebf68eeff, accessed 25  March 2022). 113 GBD Results Tool. In: Global Health Data Exchange [website].  Seattle (https://ghdx.healthdata.org/gbd-results-tool?params=gbdapi-2019-permalink/[PHONE_REDACTED]bfa831846a9a7f, accessed 28  March 2022). 114 Management of physical health conditions in adults with severe  mental disorders: WHO guidelines. Geneva: World Health Organization;  2018 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/275718, accessed 25  March 2022). 115 Chesney E, Goodwin GM, Fazel S. Risks of all-cause and suicide  mortality in mental disorders: a meta-review. World Psychiatry.  2014;13(2):153–160. doi:10.1002/wps.20128.  116 Correll CU, Detraux J, De Lepeleire J, De Hert M. Effects of  antipsychotics, antidepressants and mood stabilizers on risk for  physical diseases in people with schizophrenia, depression and bipolar  disorder. World Psychiatry. 2015;14(2):119–136. doi:10.1002/wps.20204. 117 Thornicroft G, Rose D, Kassam A. Discrimination in health care  against people with mental illness. Int Rev Psychiatry. 2009;19(2):113– 122. doi:10.1080/[PHONE_REDACTED]. 118 Smith DJ, Langan J, McLean G, Guthrie B, Mercer SW. Schizophrenia  is associated with excess multiple physical-health comorbidities  but low levels of recorded cardiovascular disease in primary care:  cross-sectional study. BMJ Open. 2013;3(4):e002808. doi:10.1136/ bmjopen-[PHONE_REDACTED]. 119 Smith DJ, Martin D, McLean G, Langan J, Guthrie B,  Mercer SW. Multimorbidity in bipolar disorder and undertreatment of  cardiovascular disease: a cross sectional study. BMC Med. 2013;11:263.  doi:10.1186/[PHONE_REDACTED]. 120 Liu NH, Daumit GL, Dua T, Aquila R, Charlson F, Cuijpers P, et al.  Excess mortality in persons with severe mental disorders: a multilevel  intervention framework and priorities for clinical practice, policy and  research agendas. World Psychiatry. 2017;16(1):30–40. doi:10.1002/ wps.20384. 121 Charlson FJ, Baxter AJ, Dua T, Degenhardt L, Whiteford HA, Vos T.  Excess mortality from mental, neurological and substance use disorders  in the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Epidemiol Psychiatr Sci.  2015;24(2):121–140. doi:10.1017/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 122 Thornicroft G. Physical health disparities and mental illness: the  scandal of premature mortality. Br J Psychiatry. 2011;199(6):441–442.  doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.111.092718. 123 Global Health Estimates 2019: Deaths by cause, age, sex, by country  and by region, 2000–2019. Geneva: World Health Organization; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/gho-documents/globalhealth-estimates/ghe2019_deaths-2000-country1d20517f-89e[PHONE_REDACTED]b639-26acbda9b8f8.xlsx?sfvrsn=51458b03_7, accessed 25 March 2022). 124 Preventing suicide: a global imperative. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2014 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/131056,  accessed 28 March 2022). 125 Suicide worldwide in 2019: Global health estimates. Geneva:  World Health Organization; 2021 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/341728, accessed 25 March 2022). 126 Global Health Estimates 2019: Deaths by cause, age, sex, by country  and by region, 2000–2019. Geneva: World Health Organization; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/themes/mortality-and-globalhealth-estimates/ghe-leading-causes-of-death, accessed 25 March  2022). 127 Vigo D, Thornicroft G, Atun R. Estimating the true global burden  of mental illness. Lancet Psychiatry. 2016;3(2):171–178. doi:10.1016/ S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 128 Global Health Estimates 2019: disease burden by cause, age, sex, by  country and by region, [PHONE_REDACTED]. Geneva, World Health Organization;  2020 (https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/gho-documents/ global-health-estimates/ghe2019_daly_global_2000_[PHONE_REDACTED]cc197- 7fec-4494-9b12-64d[PHONE_REDACTED]b.xlsx?sfvrsn=ab2e645c_9, accessed 25  March 2022). 129 Global Health Estimates 2019: disease burden by cause, age, sex, by  country and by region, 2000–2019. Geneva, World Health Organization;  2020 (https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/gho-documents/ global-health-estimates/ghe2019_yld_global_2000_2019c417f68b- 841d-4a7a-9e5c-f087f9f86e48.xlsx?sfvrsn=dac29788_7, accessed 25  March [PHONE_REDACTED]GBD 2019 Risk Factors Collaborators. Global burden of 87 risk  factors in 204 countries and territories, 1990–2019: a systematic  analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. Lancet.  2020;396:1223–1249. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 131 Bloom DE, Cafiero ET, Jané-Llopis E, Abrahams-Gessel S, Bloom LR,  Fathima S, et al. The global economic burden of noncommunicable diseases. Geneva: World Economic Forum; 2011 (http://www3.weforum. org/docs/WEF_Harvard_HE_GlobalEconomicBurdenNonCommunicableDiseases_2011.pdf, accessed 25 March 2022). 132 Prevention and management of mental health conditions in the  Philippines: the case for investment. Manila: World Health Organization  Regional Office for the Western Pacific; 2021 (https://www.ph.undp.org/ content/philippines/en/home/library/prevention-and-management-ofmental-health-conditions-in-the-phi.html, accessed 25 March 2022). 133 Christensen MK, Lim CCW, Saha S, Plana-Ripoll O,  Cannon D, Presley F, et al. The cost of mental disorders: a systematic  review. Epidemiol Psychiatr Sci. 2020;29:e161. doi:10.1017/ S[PHONE_REDACTED]X. 134 Ryan G, Iemmi V, Hanna F, Loryman H, Eaton J. Mental health for  sustainable development: a topic guide for development professionals.  London and Brighton: Mental Health Innovation Network and Institute  for Development Studies; 2020 (https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/ handle/20.500.12413/14908, accessed 25 March 2022). 135 Saxena S, Kline S. Countdown global mental health 2030: data to  drive action and accountability. Lancet Psychiatry. 2021;8(11):941–942.  doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 136 Countdown global mental health 2030: data to drive action and  accountability. London: United for Mental Health; 2021 (https:// unitedgmh.org/countdown-global-mental-health, accessed 25 March  2022). 137 Woelbert E, White R, Lundell-Smith K, Grant J, Kemmer D.  Inequities of mental health research funding. Montreal: International  Alliance of Mental Health Research Funders; 2020. doi:10.6084/ m9.figshare.[PHONE_REDACTED].v2. 138 Abimbola S, Asthana S, Montenegro C, Guinto RR, Jumbam DT,  Louskieter L, et al. Addressing power asymmetries in global health:  imperatives in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. PLoS Med.  2021;18(4):e[PHONE_REDACTED]. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 139 Eaton J, Carroll A, Scherer N, Daniel L, Njenga M, Sunkel C, et al.  Accountability for the rights of people with psychosocial disabilities:  an assessment of country reports for the Convention on the Rights of  Persons with Disabilities. Health Hum Rights. 2021;23(1):175–189. 140 Saxena S, Thornicroft G, Knapp M, Whiteford H. Resources  for mental health: scarcity, inequity, and inefficiency. Lancet.  2007;[PHONE_REDACTED]:[PHONE_REDACTED]. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 141 Alegría M, Chatterji P, Wells K, Cao Z, Chen CN, Takeuchi D, et al.  Disparity in depression treatment among racial and ethnic minority  populations in the United States. Psychiatric Services. 2008; 59:1264– 1272. doi:10.1176/appi.ps.59.11.1264. 142 Liese BH, Gribble RSF, Wickremsinhe MN. International funding for  mental health: a review of the last decade. Int Health. 2019;11(5):361– 369. doi:10.1093/inthealth/ihz040. [PHONE_REDACTED]Global Health Estimates 2016: DALYs by age, sex and cause. In:  Global Health Estimates 2019: disease burden by cause, age, sex, by  country and by region, 2000–2019. Geneva: World Health Organization;  2020 (https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/themes/mortality-andglobal-health-estimates/global-health-estimates-leading-causes-ofdalys, accessed 25 March 2022). 144 Todesco B, Ostuzzi G, Barbui C. Mapping the selection,  availability, price and affordability of essential medicines for mental  health conditions at a global level. Epidemiol Psychiatr Sci. Apr  19;31:e22. doi:10.1017/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. PMID: [PHONE_REDACTED]; PMCID:  PMC[PHONE_REDACTED].  145 Measuring digital development: facts and figures 2020. Geneva:  International Telecommunications Union; 2020 (https://www.itu.int/en/ ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/facts/default.aspx, accessed 25 March 2022). 146 Greer B, Robotham D, Simblett S, Curtis H, Griffiths H,  Wykes T. Digital exclusion among mental health service users:  qualitative investigation. J Med Internet Res. 2019;21(1):e11696.  doi:10.2196/11696. 147 Moitra M, Santomauro D, Collins PY, Vos T, Whiteford H, Saxena S, et  al. The global gap in treatment coverage for major depressive disorder  in 84 countries from 2000–2019: a systematic review and Bayesian  meta-regression analysis. PLoS Med. 2022;19(2):e[PHONE_REDACTED]. doi:10.1371/ journal.pmed.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 148 Gorringe J, Hughes D, Kidy F, Kesner C, Sale J, Sabouni A. Return  on the individual: time to invest in mental health. London: United  for Global Mental Health; 2020 (https://unitedgmh.org/sites/default/ files/[PHONE_REDACTED]/The%20Return%20on%20the%20Individual_Full%20 Report_2.pdf, accessed 26 May 2022). 149 Patel V, Chisholm D, Kirkwood BR, Mabey D. Prioritizing health  problems in women in developing countries: comparing the financial  burden of reproductive tract infections, anaemia and depressive  disorders in a community survey in India. Trop Med Int Health.  2006;12(1):130–139. doi:10.1111/j.[PHONE_REDACTED].2006.01756.x. 150 Wellcome Global Monitor 2020: Mental health. London: Wellcome  Trust; 2021 (https://wellcome.org/reports/wellcome-global-monitormental-health/2020, accessed 25 March 2022). 151 Rhodes A. Child mental health problems: can parents spot the  signs? Melbourne: The Royal Children’s Hospital; 2017 (https://www. rchpoll.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/RCH-National-ChildHealth-Poll-Report_Poll-8_Final.pdf, accessed 25 March 2022). 152 Shi W, Shen Z, Wang S, Hall BJ. Barriers to professional health helpseeking among Chinese adults: a systematic review. Front. Psychiatry.  2020;11:442. doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2020.00442. 153 Ventevogel P, Jordans M, Reis R, de Jong J. Madness or sadness?  Local concepts of mental illness in four conflict-affected African  communities. Confl health. 2013;7(1):1–16. doi:10.1186/[PHONE_REDACTED]. 154 Funk M, Drew N, Freeman M, Faydi E. Mental health and  development: targeting people with mental health conditions as a  vulnerable group. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010 (https:// www.who.int/publications/i/item/[PHONE_REDACTED], accessed 25 March  2022). 155 Thornicroft G. Shunned: discrimination against People with Mental  Illness. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2006. 156 Corrigan P, Watson AC. Understanding the impact of stigma on  people with mental illness. World Psychiatry. 2002;1(1):16–20. 157 Gureje O, Lasebikan VO, Ephraim-Oluwanuga O, Olley BO, Kola L.  Community study of knowledge of and attitude to mental illness in  Nigeria. Br J Psychiatry 2005;186:436–441. doi:10.1192/bjp.186.5.436. 158 Polyakov M, Sale J, Kline S, Saxena S. No health without mental  health: the urgent need for health integration in universal health  coverage. London: United for Global Mental Health; 2020 (https:// unitedgmh.org/sites/default/files/[PHONE_REDACTED]/Universal%20Health%20 Coverage%20-%20No%20Health%20Without%20Mental%20Health. pdf, accessed 25 March 2022). 159 mhGAP Evidence Resource Centre. In: WHO [website]. Geneva:  World Health Organization; 2021 (https://www.who.int/teams/ mental-health-and-substance-use/treatment-care/mental-healthgap-action-programme/evidence-centre, accessed 25 March 2022). 160 Caddick H, Horne B, Mackenzie J, Tilley H. Investing in mental  health in low-income countries. ODI Insights report. Overseas  Development Institute: London; 2016 (https://odi.org/en/ publications/investing-in-mental-health-in-low-income-countries,  accessed 25 March 2022). 161 mhGAP operations manual. Geneva: World Health Organization;  2018 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/275386, accessed 28  March 2022). 162 Stein DJ, Benjet C, Gureje O, Lund C, Scott KM, Poznyak V, et al.  Integrating mental health with other non-communicable diseases. BMJ.  2019;364:l295. doi:10.1136/bmj.l295. 163 Scott KM, Von Korff M, Angermeyer MC, Benjet C, Bruffaerts R,  de Girolamo G, et al. Association of childhood adversities and earlyonset mental disorders with adult-onset chronic physical conditions.  Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2011;68(8):838–844. doi:10.1001/ archgenpsychiatry.2011.77. 164 Berkowitz AL, Raibagkar P, Pritt BS, Mateen FJ. Neurological  manifestations of the neglected tropical diseases. J Neurol Sci.  2015;349(1–2):20–32. 165 Thakur KT, Boubour A, Saylor D, Das M, Bearden DR, Birbeck GL.  Global HIV neurology: A comprehensive review. Aids. 2019; 33(2):163– 184. doi:10.1097/QAD.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 166 Integration of mental health and HIV interventions: key  considerations. Geneva: UNAIDS and World Health Organization; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://www.unaids.org/sites/default/files/media_asset/integrationmental-health-hiv-interventions_en.pdf, accessed 11 May 2022). 167 Fujiwara PI. The links between tuberculosis and mental health:  evidence and best practice incorporating guidance to USAID.  Washington DC: USAID; 2022 (https://www.usaid.gov/global-health/ health-areas/tuberculosis/resources/publications/link-tuberculosismental-health, accessed 25 March 2022). 168 Mental health of people with neglected tropical diseases:  Towards a person-centred approach. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2020 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/335885,  accessed 25 March 2022). 169 Moussavi S, Chatterji S, Verdes E, Tandon A, Patel V, Ustun B.  Depression, chronic diseases, and decrements in health: results  from the World Health Surveys. Lancet. 2007;[PHONE_REDACTED]:851–858.  doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 170 Ciesla JA, Roberts JE. Meta-analysis of the relationship between  HIV infection and risk for depressive disorders. Am J Psychiatry.  2001;158(5):725–730. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.158.5.725. 171 Pelton M, Ciarletta M, Wisnousky H, Lazzara N, Manglani M,  Ba DM, et al. Rates and risk factors for suicidal ideation, suicide  attempts and suicide deaths in persons with HIV: a systematic review  and meta-analysis. Gen Psychiatry 2021;34:e100247. doi:10.1136/ gpsych-[PHONE_REDACTED]. 172 Ambaw F, Mayston R, Hanlon C, Medhin G, Alem A. Untreated  depression and tuberculosis treatment outcomes, quality of life  and disability, Ethiopia. Bull World Health Organ. 2018;96:243–255.  doi:10.2471/BLT.17.192658. 173 Sartorius N. Comorbitiy of mental and physical diseases: a main  challenge for medicine of the 21st century. Shanghai Arch Psychiatry.  2013;25(2):68–69. doi:10.3969/j.issn.[PHONE_REDACTED].2013.02.002. 174 Integrating the prevention, treatment and care of mental health  conditions and other noncommunicable diseases within health  systems. WHO European high-level conference on noncommunicable  diseases. Copenhagen: World Health Organization Regional Office  for Europe; 2019 (https://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_ file/0004/397786/Mental-Health-Conditions-ENG.pdf, accessed 25  March 2022). 175 Integrating the response to mental disorders and other chronic  diseases in health care systems. Geneva: World Health Organization;  2014 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/112830, accessed 25  March 2022). 176 Archer J, Bower P, Gilbody S, Lovell K, Richards D, Gask L, et al.  Collaborative care for depression and anxiety problems. Cochrane  Database Syst Rev. 2012;10:CD006525. doi:10.1002/[PHONE_REDACTED]. CD006525.pub2.   [PHONE_REDACTED]Li LW, Xue J, Conwell Y, Yang Q, Chen S. Implementing collaborative  care for older people with comorbid hypertension and depression in  rural China. Int Psychogeriatr. 2020;32(12):[PHONE_REDACTED]. doi:10.1017/ S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 178 Knapp M, Funk M, Curran C, Prince M, Grigg M, McDaid D. Economic  barriers to better mental health practice and policy. Health Policy Plan.  2006;21(3):157–170. doi:10.1093/heapol/czl003. 179 UHC Compendium. In: WHO/Universal Health Coverage  [website]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021 (https:// www.who.int/universal-health-coverage/compendium/database,  accessed 25 March 2022). 180 Aguilera I, Infante A, Ormeño H, Urriola C. Improving health  system efficiency: Chile: Implementation of the Universal Access  with Explicit Guarantees (AUGE) reform. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2015 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/187657,  accessed 25 March 2022). 181 Bitran R. Explicit health guarantees for Chileans: the AUGE  benefits package. Washington DC: The World Bank; 2013. (https:// documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents-reports/ documentdetail/[PHONE_REDACTED]/explicit-health-guarantees-forchileans-the-auge-benefits-package, accessed 25 March 2022). 182 Araya R, Zitko P, Markkula N. The impact of universal health care  programmes on improving ‘realized access’ to care for depression in  Chile. Adm Policy Ment Health. 2018;45:790–799. doi:10.1007/s[PHONE_REDACTED]z. 183 Lasalvia A, Zoppei S, Van Bortel T, Bonetto C, Cristofalo D,  Wahlbeck K, et al. Global pattern of experienced and anticipated  discrimination reported by people with major depressive disorder:  A cross-sectional survey. Lancet. 2013;[PHONE_REDACTED]:55–62. doi:10.1016/ S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 184 QualityRights materials for training, guidance and transformation.  Geneva: World Health Organization; 2019 (https://www.who.int/ publications/i/item/who-qualityrights-guidance-and-training-tools,  accessed 25 March 2022). 185 Thornicroft G, Mehta N, Clement S, Evans-Lacko S, Doherty  M, Rose D, et al. Evidence for effective interventions to reduce  mental-health-related stigma and discrimination. Lancet.  2016;[PHONE_REDACTED]:1123–1132. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 186 Corrigan PW, River LP, Lundin RK, Penn DL, Uphoff-Wasowski K,  Campion J, et al. Three strategies for changing attributions about  severe mental illness. Schizophr Bull. 2001;27(2):187–195. doi:10.1093/ oxfordjournals.schbul.a006865. 187 Clay J, Eaton J, Gronholm PC, Semrau M, Votruba N. Core  components of mental health stigma reduction interventions in  low- and middle-income countries: a systematic review. Epidemiolo  Psychiatr Sci. 2020;29:e164. doi:10.1017/S[PHONE_REDACTED].  188 Committee on the Science of Changing Behavioral Health Social  Norms; Board on Behavioral, Cognitive, and Sensory Sciences; Division  of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education; National Academies  of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Ending discrimination against  people with mental and substance use disorders: the evidence for  stigma change. Washington DC: National Academies Press; 2016.  doi:10.17226/23442.  189 Strengthening mental health [website]. London: The Indigo  Network; 2021 (https://indigo-group.org/, accessed 24 October 2021). 190 Thornicroft G, Bakolis I, Evans-Lacko S, Gronholm PC, Henderson  C, Kohrt BA, et al. Key lessons learned from the INDIGO global network  on mental health related stigma and discrimination. World Psychiatry.  2019;18(2):229–230. doi:10.1002/wps.20628. 191 Yon Y, Ramiro-Gonzalez M, Mikton CR, Huber M, Sethi D. The  prevalence of elder abuse in institutional settings: a systematic  review and meta-analysis. Eur J Public Health. 2019;29(1):58–67.  doi:10.1093/eurpub/cky093. 192 Desmond C, Watt K, Saha A, Huang J, Lu C. Prevalence and number  of children living in institutional care: Global, regional and country  estimates. Lancet Child Adolesc Health. 2020;4(5):370–377. doi:10.1016/  S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 193 WHO and the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation. Promoting rights  and community living for children with psychosocial disabilities.  Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/184033, accessed 25 March 2022).  194 Living in chains: shackling of people with psychosocial disabilities  worldwide. New York: Human Rights Watch; 2020 (https://www.hrw. org/report/2020/10/06/living-chains/shackling-people-psychosocialdisabilities-worldwide, accessed 23 November 2021).  195 Peterson I, Marais D, Abdulmalik J, Ahuja S, Alem A, Chisholm D,  et al. Strengthening mental health system governance in six low- and  middle-income countries in Africa and South Asia: Challenges, needs  and potential strategies. Health Policy Plan. 2017;32(5):699–709.  doi:10.1093/heapol/czx014. 196 WHO QualityRights e-training on mental health, recovery and  community inclusion [website]. Geneva: World Health Organization;  2022 (https://www.who.int/teams/mental-health-and-substance-use/ policy-law-rights/qr-e-training, accessed 25 March 2022). 197 WHO QualityRights [website]. Geneva: World Health Organization;  2019 (https://qualityrights.org, accessed 25 March 2022). 198 Funk M, Drew Bold N, Ansong J, Chisholm D, Murko M, Nato J,  et al. Strategies to achieve a rights-based approach through WHO  QualityRights. In: Stein MA, Mahomed F, Patel V, Sunkel C (editors).  Mental health, legal capacity and human rights. Cambridge: Cambridge  University Press; 2021. doi:10.1017/[PHONE_REDACTED]. 199 Freeman MC, Kolappa K, Caldas de Almeida JM, Kleinman A,  Makhashvili N, Phakathi S, et al. Reversing hard won victories in the  name of human rights: a critique of the General Comment on Article 12  of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Lancet  Psychiatry. 2015;2(9):844–850. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 200 Puras D, Gooding P. Mental health and human rights in the 21st  century. World Psychiatry. 2019;18(1):42–43. doi:10.1002/wps.20599. 201 Minkowitz T. CRPD advocacy by the World Network of Users and  Survivors of Psychiatry: The emergence of an user/survivor perspective  in human rights. SSRN. 2012. doi:10.2139/ssrn.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 202 Sunkel C. The UN convention: a service user perspective. World  Psychiatry. 2019;18(1):51–52. doi:10.1002/wps.20606. 203 Barbui C, Purgato M, Abdulmalik J, Caldas-de-Almeida JM, Eaton J,  Gureje O, et al. Efficacy of interventions to reduce coercive treatment in  mental health services: Umbrella review of randomised evidence.   Br J Psychiatry. 2020;1–11. doi:10.1192/bjp.2020.144. 204 Strategies to end seclusion and restraint: WHO QualityRights  specialized training: course guide. Geneva: World Health Organization;  2019 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/329605, accessed 25  March 2022). 205 Supported decision-making and advance planning: WHO  QualityRights specialized training: course guide. Geneva:  World Health Organization; 2019 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/329609, accessed 25 March 2022). 206 Vásquez Encalada A, Bialik K, Stober K. Supported decision making  in South America: Analysis of three countries’ experiences. Int J Environ  Res Public Health. 2021;18:5204. doi:10.3390/ijerph[PHONE_REDACTED]. 207 User empowerment in mental health: a statement by the WHO  Regional Office for Europe. Empowerment is not a destination, but a  journey. Copenhagen: World Health Organization Regional Office for  Europe; 2010 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/107275, accessed  25 March 2022). 208 Voice, agency, empowerment – handbook on social participation  for universal health coverage. Geneva: World Health Organization;  2021 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/342704, accessed 25  March 2022). 209 Semrau M, Lempp H, Keynejad R, Evans-Lacko S, Mugisha J, Raja S,  et al. Service user and caregiver involvement in mental health system  strengthening in low- and middle-income countries: systematic review.  BMC Health Serv Res. 2016;16:79. doi:10.1186/s[PHONE_REDACTED]. 210 Kohrt BA, Jordans MJD, Turner EL, Rai S, Gurung D, Dhakal M, et  al. Collaboration with people with lived experience of mental illness  to reduce stigma and improve primary care services: a pilot cluster  randomized clinical trial. JAMA Netw Open. 2021;4(11):e[PHONE_REDACTED].  doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.31475. 211 Civil society organizations to promote human rights in mental  health and related areas: WHO QualityRights guidance module.  Geneva: World Health Organization; 2019 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/329589, accessed 25 March 2022). [PHONE_REDACTED]Joint position statement. Equality and equity in COVID-19  response. Global Mental Health Peer Network & Human  Rights in Mental Health FGIP; 2020 (https://www.gmhpn.org/ uploads/1/2/0/2/[PHONE_REDACTED]/gmhpn___fgip_joint_position_ statement_-_covid19.pdf, accessed 25 March 2022). 213 Healthy, prosperous lives for all: the European health equity status  report. Copenhagen: World Health Organization Regional Office for  Europe; 2019 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/326879, accessed  25 March 2022). 214 Pathare S, Burgess RA, Collins PY. World Mental Health Day:  Prioritise social justice, not only access to care. Lancet. 2021;  [PHONE_REDACTED]:1859–1860. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 215 Marmot M, Allen J. Health priorities and the social determinants  of health. East Mediterr Health J. 2015;21(9):671–672 (https:// applications.emro.who.int/emhj/v21/09/EMHJ_2015_21_9_671_672. pdf?ua=1&ua=1, accessed 25 March 2022). 216 Lund C, Docrat S, Abdulmalik J, Alem A, Fekadu A, Gureje O,   et al. Household economic costs associated with mental, neurological  and substance use disorders: a cross-sectional survey in six low- and  middle-income countries. BJPsych Open. 2019;5(3):E34. doi:10.1192  bjo. 2019.20. 217 Chisholm D, Sweeny K, Sheehan P, Rasmussen B, Smit F, Cuijpers P,  et al. Scaling-up treatment of depression and anxiety: a global return  on investment analysis. Lancet Psychiatry. 2016;3(5):415–424. doi:  10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 218 Lund C, Orkin K, Witte M, Davies T, Haushofer J, Bass J, et al. The  economic effects of mental health interventions in low- and middleincome countries: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Working  paper. 2018 (https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Economicimpacts-of-mental-health-interventions-in-Lund-Orkin/023b6dd83154 b0793efaec987aba6e7d493f7854, accessed 26 May 2022). 219 Kangasniemi A, Maxwell L, Sereneo M. The ROI in workplace mental  health programs: good for people, good for business: a blueprint for  workplace mental health programs. New York: Deloitte; 2019 (https:// www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/topics/talent/workplace-mentalhealth-programs-worker-productivity.html, accessed 25 March 2022). 220 Santini ZI, Becher H, Jørgensen MB, Davidsen M, Nielsen L,  Hinrichsen C, et al. Economics of mental well-being: a prospective study  estimating associated health care costs and sickness benefit transfers  in Denmark. Eur J Health Econ. 2021;22:1053–1065. doi:10.1007/ s[PHONE_REDACTED].  221 Mental health investment case: a guidance note. Geneva: World  Health Organization and United Nations Development Programme;  2021 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/340246, accessed 25  March 2022).  222 WHO menu of cost–effective interventions for mental health.  Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/343074, accessed 25 March 2022). 223 Chisholm D, Saxena S. Cost effectiveness of strategies to combat  neuropsychiatric conditions in sub-Saharan Africa and South  East Asia: mathematical modelling study. BMJ. 2012;344:e609.  doi:10.1136/bmj.e609. 224 Chisholm D, Burman-Roy S, Fekadu A, Kathree T, Kizza D,  Luitel NP, et al. Estimating the cost of implementing district mental  healthcare plans in five low- and middle-income countries: the PRIME  study. Br J Psychiatry. 2016;208(Suppl 56):s71–s78. doi:10.1192/bjp. bp.114.153866. 225 Care for mental health conditions in Jamaica: The case for  investment. Evaluating the return on investment of scaling up  treatment for depression, anxiety, and psychosis. Washington DC:  Panamerican Health Organization; 2019. 226 Prevention and management of mental health conditions in the  Philippines. The case for investment. Manila: World Health Organization  Regional Office for the Western Pacific; 2021. 227 Besada D, Docrat S, Lund C. Mental health investment case for  South Africa. Final report of the Mental Health investment case task  team. Pretoria: Department of Health; 2021. 228 Prevention and management of mental health conditions in  Uzbekistan: the case for investment. Copenhagen: World Health  Organization Regional Office for Europe; 2021. 229 Everybody’s business. Strengthening health systems to improve  health outcomes: WHO’s framework for action. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2007 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/43918,  accessed 28 March 2022). 230 International standards on the right to physical and mental  health. In: UN Human Rights [website]. New York: Office of the High  Commissioner for Human Rights; 2021 (https://www.ohchr.org/ en/issues/health/pages/internationalstandards.aspx, accessed 28  March 2022). 231 Resolution A/RES/70/1. In: Seventieth United Nations General  Assembly, New York, 25 September 2015. Transforming our world: the  2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. New York: United Nations  General Assembly; 2015 (https://sdgs.un.org/2030agenda, accessed 28  March 2022). 232 Resolution A/RES/73/2. In: Seventy-third United Nations General  Assembly, New York, 10 October 2018. Political declaration of the third  high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the prevention and  control of non-communicable diseases. New York: United Nations  General Assembly; 2018 (https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/[PHONE_REDACTED],  accessed 28 March 2022). 233 Resolution A/RES/74/2. In: Seventy-fourth United Nations General  Assembly, New York, 10 October 2019. Political declaration of the highlevel meeting on universal health coverage: New York: United Nations  General Assembly; 2019 (https://undocs.org/en/A/RES/74/2, accessed  28 March 2022). 234 WHO Special Initiative for Mental Health. In: WHO/Initiatives  [website]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021 (https://www.who. int/initiatives/who-special-initiative-for-mental-health, accessed 28  March 2022). 235 Patel V, Saxena S. Achieving universal health coverage for mental  disorders. BMJ. 2019;366:I4516. doi:10.1136/bmj.l4516. 236 Campion J, Knapp M. The economic case for improved coverage of  public mental health interventions. Lancet Psychiatry 2018;5(2):103– 105. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 237 Caldas de Almeida JM, Minas H, Cayetano C. Generating political  commitment for mental health system development. In: Patel V,  Minas H, Cohen A, Prince M (editors). Global mental health: principles  and practice. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2013. doi:10.1093/ med/[PHONE_REDACTED].003.0020. 238 The World Mental Health Survey Initiative [website]. Boston:  Harvard University; 2021 (https://www.hcp.med.harvard.edu/ wmh, accessed 28 March 2022). 239 Demyttenaere K, Bruffaerts R, Posada-Villa J, Gasquet I, Kovess V,  Lepine JP, et al. Prevalence, severity, and unmet need for treatment of  mental disorders in the World Health Organization World Mental Health  Surveys. JAMA. 2004;[PHONE_REDACTED]:2581–2590. doi:10.1001/jama.291.21.2581. 240 Kessler RC, Angermeyer M, Anthony JC, Graaf RDE, Demyttenaere K,  Gasquet I, et al. Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions  of mental disorders in the World Health Organization’s World Mental  Health Survey Initiative. World Psychiatry. 2007;6(3):168–176. 241 Dua T, Barbui C, Clark N, Fleischmann A, Poznyak V,  van Ommeren M, et al. Evidence-based guidelines for mental,  neurological, and substance use disorders in low- and middle-income  countries: summary of WHO recommendations. 2011;8(11):e[PHONE_REDACTED].  doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 242 England MJ, Butler AS, Gonzalez ML (editors). Psychosocial  interventions for mental and substance use disorders: a framework  for establishing evidence-based standards. Washington DC: National  Academies Press; 2015. 243 WHO model lists of essential medicines. In: WHO [website]. Geneva:  World Health Organization; 2021 (https://www.who.int/groups/expertcommittee-on-selection-and-use-of-essential-medicines/essentialmedicines-lists, accessed 28 March 2022). 244 mhGAP intervention guide for mental, neurological and substance  use disorders in non-specialized health settings: mental health Gap  Action Programme (mhGAP), version 2.0. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2016 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/250239,  accessed 25 March 2022). 245 ICD-11: International Classification of Diseases 11th Revision  [website]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020 (https://icd.who. int, accessed 28 March 2022). [PHONE_REDACTED]Clinical descriptions and diagnostic requirements for ICD-11  mental, behavioural, and neurodevelopmental disorders. Geneva:  World Health Organization; in press. 247 Reed GM, First MB, Kogan CS, Hyman SE, Gureje O, Gaebel W, et  al. Innovations and changes in the ICD-11 classification of mental,  behavioural and neurodevelopmental disorders. World Psychiatry.  2019;18(1):3–19. doi:10.1002/wps.20611. 248 Mental health information systems. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2005 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/43210,  accessed 28 March [PHONE_REDACTED]Mayston R, Ebhohimen K, Jacob K. Measuring what matters –  information systems for management of chronic disease in primary  healthcare settings in low and middle-income countries: challenges  and opportunities. Epidemiol Psychiatric Sci. 2020;20(e127):1–5.  doi:10.1017/S[PHONE_REDACTED]X. 250 Upadhaya N, Jordans MJD, Abdulmalik J, Ahuja S, Alem A,  Hanlon C, et al. Information systems for mental health in six low and  middle income countries: cross country situation analysis. Int J Ment  Health Syst. 2016;10:60. doi:10.1186/s[PHONE_REDACTED]. 251 Collins PY, Patel V, Joestl SJ, March D, Insel TR, Daar AS, et al. Grand  challenges in global mental health. Nature. 2011;[PHONE_REDACTED]:27–30.  doi:10.1038/475027a. 252 Saraceno B. Mental health systems research is urgently needed. Int  J Ment Health Syst. 2007;1(1):2. doi:10.1186/[PHONE_REDACTED]. 253 Staley K, Kabir T, Szmukler G. Service users as collaborators  in mental health research: less stick, more carrot. Psychol Med.  2013;43(6):1121–1125. doi:10.1017/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 254 Votruba N, Grant J, Thornicroft G. The EVITA framework for  evidence-based mental health policy agenda setting in low-and middleincome countries. Health Policy Plan. 2020;35(4):424–439. doi:10.1093/ heapol/czz179. 255 Fox AM, Goldberg AB, Gore RJ, Bärnighausen T. Conceptual and  methodological challenges to measuring political commitment to  respond to HIV. J Int AIDS Soc. 2011;14(Suppl 2):S5. doi:10.1186/[PHONE_REDACTED]S2-S5. 256 Iemmi V. Motivation and methods of external organisations  investing in mental health in low-income and middle-income countries:  a qualitative study. Lancet Psychiatry. 2021;S[PHONE_REDACTED].  doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 257 Advocacy for mental health, disability and human rights: WHO  QualityRights guidance module. Geneva: World Health Organization;  2019 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/329587, accessed 28  March 2022). 258 Saraceno B, van Ommeren M, Batniji R, Cohen A,  Gureje O, Mahoney J, et al. Barriers to improvement of mental  health services in low-income and middle-income countries. Lancet.  2007;[PHONE_REDACTED]:1164–1174. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]X. 259 World Mental Health Day. In: WHO [website]. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2021 (https://www.who.int/campaigns/world-mentalhealth-day, accessed 28 March 2022). 260 Caldas de Almeida JM, Horvitz-Lennon M. Mental health care  reforms in Latin America: an overview of mental health care reforms in  Latin America and the Caribbean. Psychiatr Serv. 2010;61(3):218–221.  doi:10.1176/ps.2010.61.3.218. 261 Building back better: sustainable mental health care after  emergencies. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013 (https://apps. who.int/iris/handle/10665/85377, accessed 28 March 2022). 262 Expansion of Mental health Services in Sri Lanka. Colombo: Ministry  of Health Sri Lanka and WHO Country Office for Sri Lanka; 2021. 263 Promoting mental health preparedness and response for public  health emergencies. In: 148th Session Executive Board, Geneva,   [PHONE_REDACTED]January 2021. Resolutions and decisions, annexes. Geneva:  World Health Organization; 2021 (EB148(3); https://apps.who.int/gb/ ebwha/pdf_files/EB148-REC1/B148_REC1-en.pdf#page=32, accessed  28 March 2022). 264 Shidhaye R, Murhar V, Gangale S, Aldridge L, Shastri R, Parikh R,  et al. The effect of VISHRAM, a grass-roots community-based mental  health programme, on the treatment gap for depression in rural  communities in India: a population-based study. Lancet Psychiatry.  2017;4(2):128–135. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 265 Jordans MJD, Luitel NP, Lund C, Kohrt BA. Evaluation of proactive  community case detection to increase help seeking for mental  health care: a pragmatic randomized controlled trial. Psychiatr Serv.  2020;71(8):810–815. doi:10.1176/appi.ps.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 266 Naslund JA, Aschbrenner KA, Araya R, Marsch LA, Unützer J, Patel V,  et al. Digital technology for treating and preventing mental disorders  in low-income and middle-income countries: a narrative review of the  literature. Lancet Psychiatry. 2017;4(6):486–500. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 267 Martinez-Martin N, Dasgupta I, Carter A, Chandler JA, Kellmeyer P,  Kreitmair K, et al. Ethics of digital mental health during COVID-19:  crisis and opportunities. JMIR Ment Health. 2020;7(12):e23776.  doi:10.2196/23776. 268 Guidelines on physical activity, sedentary behaviour and  sleep for children under 5 years of age. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2019 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/311664,  accessed 8 April 2022). 269 Standards for healthy eating, physical activity, sedentary behaviour  and sleep in early childhood education and care settings: a toolkit.  Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/345926, accessed 8 April [PHONE_REDACTED]Mihara S, Higuchi S. Cross-sectional and longitudinal  epidemiological studies of Internet gaming disorder: a systematic  review of the literature. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2017;71(7):425–444.  doi:10.1111/pcn.12532. 271 Araya R, Rossi Menezes P, Garcia Claro H, Brandt LR, Daley KL,  Quayle J, et al. Effect of a digital intervention on depressive symptoms  in patients with comorbid hypertension or diabetes in Brazil and  Peru: two randomized clinical trials. JAMA. 2021;[PHONE_REDACTED]:1852–1862.  doi:10.1001/jama.2021.4348.  272 Mental well-being: resources for the public. In: WHO [website].  Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021 (https://www.who.int/newsroom/feature-stories/mental-well-being-resources-for-the-public,  accessed 28 March 2022). 273 Resources. In: Global Mental Health Peer Network [website].  Johannesburg: Global Mental Health Peer Network; 2021 (https://www. gmhpn.org/resources.html, accessed 28 March 2022). 274 Liu S, Yang L, Zhang C, Xiang Y-T, Liu Z, Hu S, et al. Online mental  health services in China during the COVID-19 outbreak. Lancet  Psychiatry. 2020;7(4):e17–e18. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 275 EMPOWER [website]. Boston: EMPOWER; 2021 (https://empower. care, accessed 28 March 2022). 276 Virtual Campus for Public Health [website]. Washington DC:  Panamerican Health Organization; 2021 (https://www.campusvirtualsp. org, accessed 28 March 2022). 277 PAHO’s virtual campus offers courses on COVID-19. PAHO/BIREME/ WHO Bulletin 43. Washington DC; Pan American Health Organization;  2020 (https://boletin.bireme.org/en/2020/04/30/pahos-virtual-campusoffers-courses-on-covid-19, accessed 28 March 2022). 278 Khoja S, Scott R, Husyin N, Durrani H, Arif M, Faqiri F, et al. Impact  of simple conventional and telehealth solutions on improving mental  health in Afghanistan. J Telemed Telecare. 2016;22(8):495–498.  doi:10.1177/[PHONE_REDACTED]X[PHONE_REDACTED]. 279 Berryhill MB, Culmer N, Williams N, Halli-Tierney A, Betancourt A,  Roberts H, et al. Videoconferencing psychotherapy and depression: a  systematic review. Telemed J E Health. 2019;25:435–446. doi:10.1089/ tmj.2018.0058. 280 FDA Circular No. 2020–007. Guidelines in the implementation  of the use of electronic means of prescription for drugs for the  benefit of individuals vulnerable to COVID-19. Manila: Food and  Drug Administration Philippines; 2020 (https://www.fda.gov.ph/ fda-circular-no-[PHONE_REDACTED]guidelines-in-the-implementation-of-theuse-of-electronic-means-of-prescription-for-drugs-for-the-benefit-ofindividuals-vulnerable-to-covid-19, accessed 28 March 2022). 281 Comparative effectiveness of different formats of psychological  treatments for depressive disorder. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2015 (https://www.who.int/teams/mental-healthand-substance-use/treatment-care/mental-health-gap-actionprogramme/evidence-centre/depression/comparative-effectivenessof-different-formats-of-psychological-treatments-for-depressivedisorder, accessed 27 May 2022). [PHONE_REDACTED]Sasaki N, Imamura K, Thi Thu Tran T, Thanh Nguyen H,  Kuribayashi K, Sakuraya A, et al. Effects of smartphone-based stress  management on improving work engagement among nurses in  Vietnam: secondary analysis of a three-arm randomized controlled  trial. J Med Internet Res. 2021;23(2):e20445. doi:10.2196/20445. 283 Schaub MP, Tiburcio M, Martínez-Vélez N, Ambekar A, Bhad R,  Wenger A, et al. The effectiveness of a web-based self-help program to  reduce alcohol use among adults with drinking patterns considered  harmful, hazardous, or suggestive of dependence in four low- and  middle-income countries: randomized controlled trial. J Med Internet  Res. 2021;23(8):e21686. doi:10.2196/21686. 284 McBride KA, Harrison S, Mahata S, Pfeffer K, Cardamone F, Ngigi T,  et al. Building mental health and psychosocial support capacity during  a pandemic: the process of adapting Problem Management Plus for  remote training and implementation during COVID-19 in New York city,  Europe and East Africa. Intervention. 2021;19(1):37–47. doi:10.4103/ INTV.INTV_30_20. 285 Rosenberg T. Depressed? Here’s a bench. Talk to me. New York  Times. 22 July 2019 (https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/22/opinion/ depressed-heres-a-bench-talk-to-me.html, accessed 28 March 2022). 286 Financing global mental health. London: Lion’s Head Global  Partners; 2018 (http://unitedgmh.org/sites/default/files/[PHONE_REDACTED]/ Financing-for-Global-Mental-Health-2018.pdf, accessed 28 March 2022). 287 March 2019 Epidemiological studies of mental health NIMH HDHN  Elaboration: Mental Health Technical Team. Lima: OGTI MINSA; 2019. 288 Improving networks of community mental health services in  the Asia-Pacific economies: Lima, Peru; 16–19 July 2019. Singapore:  Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation; 2020 (https://www.apec.org/ docs/default-source/Publications/2020/11/Improving-Networksof-Community-Mental-Health-Services-in-the-Asia-PacificEconomies/220_HWG_Improving-Networks-of-Community-MentalHealth-Services-in-the-Asia-Pacific-Economies.pdf, accessed 28 March  2022). 289 Chisholm D. Dollars, DALYs and decisions: economic aspects of  the mental health system. Geneva: World Health Organization; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/43574, accessed 28 March  2022). 290 United Nations multi-partner trust fund to catalyze country  action for non-communicable diseases and mental health. Geneva:  World Health Organization; 2021 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/341905, accessed 28 March 2022). 291 Charlson FJ, Dieleman J, Singh L, Whiteford HA. Donor financing for  global mental health, 1995–2015: an assessment of trends, channels,  and alignment with the disease burden. PLoS One. 2017;12:e016938.  doi:10.1371/journal.pone.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 292 Iemmi V. Philanthropy for global mental health 2000–2015. Glob  Ment Health (Camb). 2020;7:e9. doi:10.1017/gmh.2020.2. 293 Pursukoon Zindagi “Peaceful Life” COVID-19 Mental Health  Response. In: MHN/Innovations [website]. Geneva: Mental Health  Innovation Network; 2021 (https://www.mhinnovation.net/ innovations/pursukoon-zindagi-peaceful-life-covid-19-mental-healthresponse, accessed 28 March 2022). 294 IRD. Pursukoon Zindagi – ‘Peaceful Life’. Durham: Innovations in  Healthcare; 2021 (https://www.innovationsinhealthcare.org/IRD%20 Innovator%20Profile.pdf, accessed 28 March 2022). 295 Kohrt B, Asher L, Bhardwaj A, Fazel M, Jordans MJD, Mutamba BB,  et al. The role of communities in mental health care in low- and middleincome countries: a meta-review of components and competencies.  Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2018;15(6):1279. doi:10.3390/ ijerph[PHONE_REDACTED]. 296 Van Ginneken N, Yee Chin W, Chian Lim Y, Ussif A, Singh R,  Shahmalak U, et al. Primary-level worker interventions for the  care of people living with mental disorders and distress in low-  and middle-income countries. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.  2021;8(8):CD009149. doi:10.1002/[PHONE_REDACTED].CD009149.pub3. 297 Petersen I, Lund C, Bhana A, Flisher AJ. The Mental Health and  Poverty Research Programme Consortium. A task shifting approach  to primary mental health care for adults in South Africa: human  resource requirements and costs for rural settings. Health Policy Plan.  2012;27(1):42–51. doi:10.1093/heapol/czr012. 298 Kakuma R, Minas H, van Ginneken N, Dal Poz MR, Desiraju K,  Morris JE, et al. Human resources for mental health care: current  situation and strategies for action. The Lancet. 2011;[PHONE_REDACTED]:1654– 1663. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 299 Gureje O, Hollins S, Botbol M, Javed A, Jorge M, Okech V, et  al. Report of the WPA task force on brain drain. World Psychiatry.  2009;8(2):115–118. doi:10.1002/j.[PHONE_REDACTED].2009.tb00225.x. 300 Atlas: Psychiatric education and training across the world.  Geneva: World Health Organization; 2005 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/43345, accessed 28 March 2022). 301 Wondimagegn D, Pain C, Baheretibeb Y, Hodges B, Wakma M,  Rose M, et al. Toronto Addis Ababa academic collaboration: a relational,  partnership model for building educational capacity between a  high- and low-income university. Acad Med. 2018;93(12):1795–1801.  doi:10.1097/ACM.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 302 Psychiatry. In: University of Toronto [website]. Toronto: University  of Toronto; 2021 (https://taaac.ca/psychiatry, accessed 28 March 2022). 303 Gwaikolo WS, Kohrt BA, Cooper JL. Health system preparedness  for integration of mental health services in rural Liberia. BMC health  services research. 2017;17(1):508. doi:10.1186/s[PHONE_REDACTED]. 304 Fernando N, Suveendran T, de Silva C. Decentralizing provision of  mental health care in Sri Lanka. WHO South-East Asia J Pub Health.  2017;6(1):18–21. doi:10.4103/[PHONE_REDACTED].206159. 305 Spagnolo J, Lal S. Implementation and use of the Mental Health  Gap Action Programme Intervention Guide (mhGAP-IG): a review  of the grey literature. J Glob Health. 2021;11:04022. doi:10.7189/ jogh.11.04022. 306 Enhancing mental health pre-service training with the mhGAP  intervention guide: experiences and lessons learned. Geneva:  World Health Organization; 2020 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/333970, accessed 28 March 2022). 307 mhGAP training manuals for the mhGAP Intervention Guide for  mental, neurological and substance use disorders in non-specialized  health settings, version 2.0. Geneva: World Health Organization;  2021 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/259161, accessed 28  March 2022). 308 Keynejad R, Spagnolo J, Thornicroft G. WHO mental health  gap action programme (mhGAP) intervention guide: updated  systematic review on evidence and impact. Evid Based Ment Health.  2021;24(3):124–130. doi:10.1136/ebmental-[PHONE_REDACTED]. 309 Caulfield A, Catansever D, Lambert G, Van Bortel T. WHO guidance  on mental health training: a systematic review of the progress for nonspecialist health workers. BMJ Open. 2019;9:e024059. doi:10.1136/ bmjopen-[PHONE_REDACTED]. 310 mhGAP community toolkit. Mental Health Gap Action Programme  (mhGAP). Geneva: World Health Organization; 2019 (https://apps.who. int/iris/handle/10665/328742, accessed 28 March 2022). 311 Psychological first aid: facilitator’s manual for orienting field  workers. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013 (https://apps. who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/102380/[PHONE_REDACTED]_eng. pdf?sequence=1, accessed 28 March 2022). 312 One-to-one peer support by and for people with lived  experience: WHO QualityRights guidance module: module slides.  Geneva: World Health Organization; 2019 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/329643, accessed 28 March 2022). 313 Keet R, de Vetten-Mc Mahon M, Shields-Zeeman L, Ruud T,  van Weeghel J, Bahler M, et al. Recovery for all in the community;  position paper on principles and key elements of community-based  mental health care. BMC Psychiatry. 2019;19(1):174. doi:10.1186/ s[PHONE_REDACTED]z. 314 Singla DR, Kohrt BA, Murray LK, Anand A, Chorpita BF, Patel V.  Psychological treatments for the world: lessons from low- and middleincome countries. Annu Rev Clin Psychol. 2017;13:149–181.  doi:10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-[PHONE_REDACTED]. 315 Kohrt BA, Schafer A, Willhoite A, van’t Hof E, Pedersen GA,  Watts S, et al. Ensuring Quality in Psychological Support (WHO  EQUIP): developing a competent global workforce. World Psychiatry.  2020;19(1):115–116. doi:10.1002/wps.20704. [PHONE_REDACTED]Kohrt BA, Jordans MJD, Rai S, Shrestha P, Luitel NP, Ramaiya M, et  al. Therapist competence in global mental health: development of the  ENhancing Assessment of Common Therapeutic factors (ENACT) rating  scale. Behav Res Ther. 2015;69:11–21. doi:10.1016/j.brat.2015.03.009. 317 Organization of services for mental health. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2003 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/333104,  accessed 28 March 2022). 318 The optimal mix of services for mental health. Geneva: World  Health Organization; 2003 (https://www.mhinnovation.net/ sites/default/files/files/2_Optimal%20Mix%20of%20Services_ Infosheet%5B1%5D.pdf, accessed 6 May 2022). 319 Living with the times: a mental health and psychosocial support  toolkit for older adults during the COVID-19 pandemic. In: IASC  [website]. Geneva: Inter-Agency Standing Committee: 2021 (https:// interagencystandingcommittee.org/iasc-reference-group-mentalhealth-and-psychosocial-support-emergency-settings/living-timesmental-health-and-psychosocial-support-toolkit-older-adults-duringcovid-19-pandemic, accessed 19 March 2022). 320 Cuijpers P, Donker T, van Straten A, Li J, Andersson G. Is guided  self-help as effective as face-to-face psychotherapy for depression  and anxiety disorders? A systematic review and meta-analysis of  comparative outcome studies. Psychol Med. 2010;40(12):1943–1957.  doi:10.1017/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 321 Person-centred recovery planning for mental health and wellbeing: self-help tool: WHO QualityRights. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2019 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/329598,  accessed 29 March 2022). 322 Cronin P, Stein-Parbury J, Sommer J, Gill KH. What about  value for money? A cost benefit analysis of the South Eastern  Sydney Recovery and Wellbeing College. J Ment Health. 2021;1–8.  doi:10.1080/[PHONE_REDACTED].2021.[PHONE_REDACTED].  323 Crowther A, Taylor A, Toney R, Meddings S, Whale T, Jennings H,  et al. The impact of recovery colleges on mental health staff, services  and society. Epidemiol Psychiatr Sci. 2019;28(5):481–488. doi:10.1017/ S[PHONE_REDACTED]X. 324 Le LK-D, Esturas AC, Mihalopoulos C, Chiotelis O, Bucholc J,  Chatterton ML, et al. Cost–effectiveness evidence of mental health  prevention and promotion interventions: a systematic review of  economic evaluations. PLoS Med. 2021;18(5):e[PHONE_REDACTED]. doi:10.1371/ journal.pmed.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 325 Friedli L. Mental health, resilience and inequalities. Copenhagen:  World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe; 2009 (https:// apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/107925, accessed 28 March 2022). 326 Act Belong Commit [website]. Perth: Curtin University; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://www.actbelongcommit.org.au, accessed 28 March 2022). 327 Anwar-McHenry J, Donovan R. Case study: Act-Belong-Commit.  In: Barry MM, Clarke AM, Petersen I, Jenkins R (editors). Implementing  mental health promotion. Second edition. Cham: Springer; 2019.  doi:10.1007/[PHONE_REDACTED]. 328 Ho FKW, Louie LHT, Wong WH, Chan KL, Tiwari A, Chow CB, et  al. A sports-based youth development program, teen mental health,  and physical fitness: an RCT. Pediatrics. 2017;140(4):e[PHONE_REDACTED].  doi:10.1542/peds.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 329 Firth J, Solmi M, Wootton RE, Vancampfort D, Schuch FB, Hoare E,  et al. A meta-review of “lifestyle psychiatry”: the role of exercise,  smoking, diet and sleep in the prevention and treatment of mental  disorders. World Psychiatry. 2020;19(3):360–380. doi:10.1002/ wps.20773. 330 Gage SH, Hickman M, Zammit S. Association between cannabis and  psychosis: epidemiologic evidence. Biol Psychiatry. 2016;79(7):549–556.  doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.08.001. 331 WHO independent high-level commission on noncommunicable  diseases: final report. It’s time to walk the talk. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2019 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/330023,  accessed 28 March 2022). 332 Murray RM, David AS, Ajnakina O. Prevention of psychosis: moving  on from the at-risk mental state to universal primary prevention.  Psychol Med. 2021;51(1):223–227. doi:10.1017/S[PHONE_REDACTED]X. 333 Putnam RD, Leonardi R, Nanetti RY. Making democracy work: civic  traditions in modern Italy. Princeton: Princeton University Press; 1993. 334 Forsman AK, Nordmyr J, Wahlbeck K. Psychosocial interventions  for the promotion of mental health and the prevention of depression  among older adults. Health Promot Int. 2011;26(Suppl 1):i85–i107.  doi:10.1093/heapro/dar074. 335 Devries K, Watts C, Yoshihama M, Kiss L, Blima Schraiber L,  Deyessa N, et al. Violence against women is strongly associated with  suicide attempts: evidence from the WHO multi-country study on  women’s health and domestic violence against women. Soc Sci Med.  2011;73(1):79–86. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2011.05.006. 336 Respect women: preventing violence against women. Geneva:  World Health Organization; 2019 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/312261, accessed 28 March 2022). 337 INSPIRE: seven strategies for ending violence against children.  Geneva: World Health Organization and partners; 2016 (https://apps. who.int/iris/handle/10665/207717, accessed 28 March 2022). 338 Hawkins JD, Catalano RF, Kuklinski MR. Communities that care. In:  Bruinsma G, Weisburd D (editors). Encyclopedia of criminology and criminal  justice. New York: Springer; 2014. doi:10.1007/[PHONE_REDACTED]_581. 339 Oesterle S, Kuklinski MR, Hawkins JD, Skinner ML,  Guttmannova K, Rhew IC. Long-term effects of the Communities That  Care trial on substance use, antisocial behavior and violence through  age 21 years. Am J Public Health. 2018;108(5):659–665. doi:10.2105/ AJPH.2018.304320. 340 Prevention of mental disorders: effective interventions and policy  options. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2004 (https://apps.who. int/iris/handle/10665/43027, accessed 28 March 2022). 341 McGuire J, Kaiser C, Bach-Mortensen AM. A systematic review and  meta-analysis of the impact of cash transfers on subjective well-being  and mental health in low- and middle-income countries. Nat Hum  Behav. 2022. doi:10.1038/s[PHONE_REDACTED]z. 342 Modini M, Joyce S, Mykletun A, Christensen H, Bryant RA,  Mitchell PB, et al. The mental health benefits of employment: results  of a systematic meta-review. Australas Psychiatry. 2016;24(4):331–336.  doi:10.1177/[PHONE_REDACTED]. 343 Puig-Barrachina V, Giró P, Artazcoz L, Bartoll X, Cortés-Franch I,  Fernández A, et al. The impact of Active Labour Market Policies on  health outcomes: a scoping review. Eur J Public Health. 2020;30(1):36- 42. doi:10.1093/eurpub/ckz026. 344 Thomson H, Thomas S, Sellstrom E, Petticrew M. Housing  improvements for health and associated socio-economic outcomes.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;(2):CD008657. doi:10.1002/[PHONE_REDACTED]. CD008657. 345 McDaid D, Forsman A, Matosevic T, Park A-L, Wahlbeck K.  Independence and mental wellbeing (including social and emotional  wellbeing) for older people. Review 1: what are the most effective ways to  improve or protect the mental wellbeing and/or independence of older  people? London: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng32/evidence/evidence-review-1- review-of-effects-[PHONE_REDACTED], accessed 28 March 2022). 346 The mental health and psychosocial support minimum services  package [website]. Geneva: World Health Organization, UNICEF, United  Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and United Nations Population  Fund; 2022. (https://mhpssmsp.org/en, accessed 28 March 2022). 347 Cuijpers P, Pineda BS, Quero S, Karyotaki E, Struijs SY, Figueroa CA,  et al. Psychological interventions to prevent the onset of depressive  disorders: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Clinical  Psychology Review, 2020:83, 101955. doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2020.101955. 348 Moreno-Peral P, Conejo-Cerón S, Rubio-Valera M, Fernández A,  Navas-Campaña D, Rodríguez-Morejón A, et al. Effectiveness of  psychological and/or educational interventions in the prevention  of anxiety: a systematic review, meta-analysis, and metaregression. JAMA Psychiatry. 2017;74(10):1021–1029. doi:10.1001/ jamapsychiatry.2017.2509. 349 Correll CU, Galling B, Pawar A, Krivko A, Bonetto C, Ruggeri M, et  al. Comparison of early intervention services vs treatment as usual  for early-phase psychosis: a systematic review, meta-analysis and  meta-regression. JAMA Psychiatry. 2018;75(6):555–565. doi:10.1001/ jamapsychiatry.2018.0623. 350 Aceituno D, Vera N, Prina AM, McCrone P. Cost–effectiveness of  early intervention in psychosis: systematic review. Br J Psychiatry.  2019;215(1):388–394. doi:10.1192/bjp.2018.298. [PHONE_REDACTED]Sediqzadah S, Portnoy A, Kim JJ, Keshavan M, Pandya A. Cost– effectiveness of early intervention in psychosis: a modeling study.  Psychiatr Serv. 2022;appips[PHONE_REDACTED]. doi:10.1176/appi.ps.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 352 Acarturk C, Uygun E, Ilkkursun Z, Carswell K, Tedeschi F, Batu M,  et al. Effectiveness of a WHO self-help psychological intervention  for preventing mental disorders among Syrian refugees in Turkey:  a randomized controlled trial. World Psychiatry. 2022;21(1):88–95.  doi:10.1002/wps.20939. 353 Purgato M, Carswell K, Tedeschi F, Acarturk C, Anttila M, Au T,  et al. Effectiveness of self-help plus in preventing mental disorders  in refugees and asylum seekers in Western Europe: a multinational  randomized controlled trial. Psychother Psychosom. 2021;1–12.  doi:10.1159/[PHONE_REDACTED]. 354 Health in all policies. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013 (https:// apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/112636/[PHONE_REDACTED]_eng. pdf, accessed 28 March 2022). 355 WHO Global Health Estimates: suicide rates, 2000–2019. Geneva:  World Health Organization; 2019 (https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/ themes/mental-health/suicide-rates, accessed 28 March 2022).  356 Decriminalising suicide: saving lives, reducing stigma. London:  United for Global Mental Health; 2021 (https://unitedgmh.org/suicidedecriminalisation, accessed 28 March 2022. 357 LIVE LIFE: an implementation guide for suicide prevention in  countries. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021 (https://apps.who. int/iris/handle/10665/341726, accessed 28 March 2022). 358 Gunnell D, Lewis G. Studying suicide from the life-course  perspective: implications for prevention. Br J Psychiatry. 2005;187:206– 208. doi:10.1192/bjp.187.3.206.  359 Carroll R, Metcalfe C, Gunnell D. Hospital presenting self-harm  and risk of fatal and non-fatal repetition: systematic review and  meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2014;9(2):e89944. doi:10.1371/journal. pone.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 360 Mew EJ, Padmanathan P, Konradsen F, Eddleston M, Chang S-S,  Phillips MR, et al. The global burden of fatal self-poisoning with  pesticides 2006–15: systematic review. J Affect Disord. 2017;219:93–104.  doi:10.1016/j.jad.2017.05.002. 361 Lee YY, Chisholm D, Eddleston M, Gunnell D, Fleischmann A,  Konradsen F, et al. The cost–effectiveness of banning highly hazardous  pesticides to prevent suicides due to pesticide self-ingestion across  14 countries: an economic modelling study. Lancet Glob Health.  2021;9(3):E291–E300. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]X([PHONE_REDACTED].  362 Gunnell D, Knipe D, Chang S-S, Pearson M, Konradsen F, Lee WJ, et  al. Prevention of suicide with regulations aimed at restricting access to  highly hazardous pesticides: a systematic review of the international  evidence. Lancet Glob Health. 2017;5(10):e1026–e1037. doi:10.1016/ S[PHONE_REDACTED]X([PHONE_REDACTED]. 363 Sethi A, Lin C-Y, Madhavan I, Davis M, Alexander P, Eddleston M,  et al. Impact of regional bans of highly hazardous pesticides on  agricultural yields: the case of Kerala. Agric Food Security. 2022;11:9.  doi:10.1186/s[PHONE_REDACTED]z. 364 World health statistics 2017: monitoring health for the SDGs,  Sustainable Development Goals. Geneva: World Health Organization;  2017 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/255336, accessed 28  March 2022). 365 Knipe DW, Gunnell D, Eddleston M. Preventing deaths from  pesticide self-poisoning – learning from Sri Lanka’s success. Lancet  Glob Health. 2017;5(7):e651–e652. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]X([PHONE_REDACTED]. 366 Jeyaratnam J, de Alwis Seneviratne RS, Copplestone JF. Survey  of pesticide poisoning in Sri Lanka. Bull World Health Organ.  1982;60(4):615–619. 367 Pearson M, Zwi AB, Buckley NA, Manuweera G, Fernando R,  Dawson AH, et al. Policymaking ‘under the radar’: a case study of  pesticide regulation to prevent intentional poisoning in Sri Lanka.  Health Policy Plan. 2015;30(1):56–67. doi:10.1093/heapol/czt096. 368 Niederkrotenthaler T, Braun M, Pirkis J, Till B, Stack S, Sinyor M et  al. Association between suicide reporting in the media and suicide:  systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2020;368:m575.  doi:10.1136/bmjm575. 369 Niederkrotenthaler T, Reidenberg DJ, Till B, Gould MS. Increasing  help-seeking and referrals for individuals at risk for suicide by  decreasing stigma: the role of mass media. Am J Prev Med. 2014;47(3  Suppl 2):S235–S243. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2014.06.010. 370 Improving early childhood development: WHO guideline.  Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/331306, accessed 28 March 2022). 371 Guidelines on mental health promotive and preventive  interventions for adolescents: helping adolescents thrive. Geneva:  World Health Organization; 2021 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/336864, accessed 28 March 2022). 372 Helping Adolescents Thrive toolkit: strategies to promote and  protect adolescent mental health and reduce self-harm and other risk  behaviours. Geneva: World Health Organization and UNICEF; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/341327, accessed 28 March  2022). 373 Bock J, Wainstock T, Braun K, Segal M. Stress in utero: prenatal  programming of brain plasticity and cognition. Biol Psychiatry.  2015;78(5):315–326. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.02.036. 374 Turner R, Honikman S. Maternal mental health and the first [PHONE_REDACTED]days. South African Medical J. 2016;[PHONE_REDACTED]:1164–1167. doi:10.7196/ SAMJ.2017.v106i12.12129. 375 Arango C, Díaz-Caneja CM, McGorry PD, Rapoport J, Sommer IE,  Vorstman JA, et al. Preventive strategies for mental health. Lancet  Psychiatry. 2018l;5(7):591–604. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 376 Siegenthaler E, Munder T, Egger M. Effect of preventive  interventions in mentally ill parents on the mental health of the  offspring: systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Acad Child  Adolesc Psychiatry. 2012;51(1):8–17. doi:10.1016/j.jaac.2011.10.018. 377 Henderson C, Dixon S, Bauer A, Knapp M, Morrell CJ, Slade P, et  al. Cost–effectiveness of PoNDER health visitor training for mothers at  lower risk of depression: findings on prevention of postnatal depression  from a cluster- randomised controlled trial. Psychol Med. 2019;49:[PHONE_REDACTED]. doi:10.1017/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 378 Parenting for Lifelong Health: COVID-19 parenting resources. In:  WHO [website]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2022 (https://www. who.int/teams/social-determinants-of-health/parenting-for-lifelonghealth/covid-19-parenting-resources, accessed 28 March 2022). 379 Britto PR, Lye SJ, Proulx K, Yousafzai AK, Matthews SG, Vaivada T,  et al. Nurturing care: promoting early childhood development. Lancet.  2017;[PHONE_REDACTED]:91–102. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 380 Hutchings J, Williams, M. Case study: Incredible Years –  disseminating the Incredible years basic parenting programme  in Wales. In: Barry MM, Clarke AM, Peterson I, Jenkins R (editors).  Implementing mental health promotion. Cham: Springer; 2019.  doi:10.1007/[PHONE_REDACTED]. 381 Salomone E, Pacione L, Shire S, Brown FL, Reichow B, Servili C.  Development of the WHO Caregiver Skills Training program for  developmental disorders or delays. Front Psychiatry. 2019;10:769.  doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00769. 382 WHO eLearning caregiver skills training for families of children  with developmental delays or disabilities. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2022 (https://openwho.org/courses/caregiver-skillstraining, accessed 9 April 2022). 383 Report of the first virtual meeting of the External Advisory Group  (EAG) for the development of global standards for health promoting  schools and their implementation guidance. Geneva: World Health  Organization & United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural  Organization; 2020 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/339614,  accessed 28 March 2022). 384 Mental health in schools: a manual. Cairo: World Health  Organization Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://applications.emro.who.int/docs/[PHONE_REDACTED]eng.pdf,  accessed 28 March 2022). 385 Barry MM, Clarke AM, Dowling K. Promoting social and emotional  well-being in schools. Health Education. 2017;117(5):434–451.  doi:10.1108/HE-[PHONE_REDACTED]. 386 Greenberg MT, Domitrovich CE, Weissberg RP, Durlak JA. Social and  emotional learning as a public health approach to education. Future of  Children. 2017;27(1):13–32. doi:10.1353/foc.2017.0001.  [PHONE_REDACTED]Teacher’s guide to the Magnificent Mei and friends comic series.  Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/341349, accessed 10 April 2022). 388 Kutcher S, Gilberds H, Morgan C, Greene R, Hamwaka K, Perkins K.  Improving Malawian teachers’ mental health knowledge and attitudes:  an integrated school mental health literacy approach. Glob Ment  Health. 2015;2:e1. doi:10.1017/gmh.2014.8. 389 Ravindran AV, Herrera A, da Silva TL, Henderson J, Castrillo ME,  Kutcher S. Evaluating the benefits of a youth mental health curriculum  for students in Nicaragua: a parallel-group, controlled pilot  investigation. Glob Ment Health. 2018;5:e4. doi:10.1017/gmh.2017.27. 390 Kutcher S, Wei Y, Gilberds H, Ubuguyu O, Njau T, Brown A, et al. A  school mental health literacy curriculum resource training approach:  effects on Tanzanian teachers’ mental health knowledge, stigma and  help-seeking efficacy. Int J Ment Health Syst. 2016;10:50. doi:10.1186/ s[PHONE_REDACTED]. 391 Biswas T, Scott JG, Munir K, Thomas HJ, Mamun Huda M,  Mehedi Hasan M, et al. Global variation in the prevalence of bullying  victimisation amongst adolescents: role of peer and parental supports.  E Clinical Medicine. 2020;20:100276. doi:10.1016/j.eclinm.2020.100276. 392 Smokowski PR, Kopasz KH. Bullying in school: an overview of  types, effects, family characteristics, and intervention strategies. Child  and Sch. 2005;27:101–109. doi:10.1093/cs/27.2.101. 393 Stephens MM, Cook-Fasano HT, Sibbaluca K. Childhood bullying:  implications for physicians. Am Fam Physician. 2018;97(3):187–192. 394 Campion J. Public mental health: evidence, practice and  commissioning. London: Royal Society for Public Health; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://www.rsph.org.uk/our-work/policy/wellbeing/publicmental-health-evidence-practice-and-commissioning.html,  accessed 28 March 2022). 395 Gaffney H, Ttofi MM, Farrington DP. Evaluating the effectiveness  of school-bullying prevention programs: an updated meta-analytical  review. Aggress Violent Behav. 2019;45:111–133. doi:10.1016/j. avb.2018.07.001. 396 Williford A, Boulton A, Noland B, Little TD, Karna A, Salmivalli C.  Effects of the KiVa anti-bullying program on adolescents’ depression,  anxiety, and perception of peers. J Abnorm Child Psychol.  2012;40(2):289–300. doi:10.1007/s[PHONE_REDACTED]. 397 Kelleher I, Keeley H, Corcoran P, Ramsay H, Wasserman C, Carli V,  et al. Childhood trauma and psychosis in a prospective cohort study:  cause, effect, and directionality. Am J Psychiatry. 2013;170(7):734–741.  doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2012.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 398 Hermosilla S, Metzler J, Savage K, Musa M, Ager A. Child friendly  spaces impact across five humanitarian settings: a meta-analysis. BMC  Public Health. 2019;19(1):576. doi 10.1186/s[PHONE_REDACTED]. 399 Kickbusch I, Piselli D, Agrawal A, Balicer R, Banner O,  Adelhardt M, et al. The Lancet and Financial Times Commission on  governing health futures 2030: growing up in a digital world. Lancet.  2021;[PHONE_REDACTED]:1727–1776. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 400 My hero is you. Storybook for children on COVID-19. Inter-Agency  Standing Committee; 2020 (https://interagencystandingcommittee. org/iasc-reference-group-mental-health-and-psychosocial-supportemergency-settings/my-hero-you-storybook-children-covid-19,  accessed 28 March 2022). 401 My hero is you 2021. How kids can hope with  COVID-19. Inter-Agency Standing Committee; 2021 (https:// interagencystandingcommittee.org/my-hero-is-you-2021, accessed 29  March 2022). 402 Alonzo R, Hussain J, Stranges S, Anderson KK. Interplay between  social media use, sleep quality and mental health in youth: a  systematic review. Sleep Med Rev. 2021;56:101414. doi:10.1016/j. smrv.2020.101414. 403 Keles B, McCrae N, Grealish A. A systematic review: the influence  of social media on depression, anxiety and psychological distress in  adolescents. Int J Adolesc Youth. 2019:79–93. doi:10.1080/[PHONE_REDACTED].20 19.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 404 Khanh-Dao Le L, Cuevas Esturas A, Mihalopoulos C, Chiotelis O,  Bucholc J, Chatterton ML, et al. Cost–effectiveness evidence of mental  health prevention and promotion interventions: a systematic review of  economic evaluations. PLoS Med. 2021;18(5):e[PHONE_REDACTED]. doi:10.1371/ journal.pmed.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 405 Mata DA, Ramos MA, Bansal N, Khan R, Guille C, Di Angelantonio E,  et al. Prevalence of depression and depressive symptoms among  resident physicians: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA.  2015;[PHONE_REDACTED]:2373–2383. doi:10.1001/jama.2015.15845. 406 Petrie K, Milligan-Saville J, Gayed A, Deady M, Phelps A, Dell L,  et al. Prevalence of PTSD and common mental disorders amongst  ambulance personnel: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Soc  Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 2018;53(9):897–909. doi:10.1007/ s[PHONE_REDACTED]. 407 Dutheil F, Aubert C, Pereira B, Dambrun M, Moustafa F, Mermillod M,  et al. Suicide among physicians and health-care workers: a systematic  review and meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2019;14(12):e[PHONE_REDACTED].  doi:10.1371/journal.pone.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 408 Women and men in the informal economy: a statistical picture  (third edition). Geneva: International Labour Organization; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://www.ilo.org/global/publications/books/WCMS_626831/lang-- en/index.htm, accessed 28 March 2022). 409 Putting science to work: understanding what works for workplace  mental health. London: Wellcome Trust; 2021 (https://wellcome. org/reports/understanding-what-works-workplace-mental-health,  accessed 28 March 2022). 410 Article 27: Work and employment. In: Convention on the Rights of  Persons with Disabilities (CRPD). United Nations (https://www.un.org/ development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-personswith-disabilities/article-27-work-and-employment.html, accessed 28  March 2022). 411 Biggs D, Hovey N, Tyson PJ, MacDonald S. Employer and  employment agency attitudes towards employing individuals with  mental health needs. J Mental Health. 2010;19(6):505–516. doi:10.3109/ [PHONE_REDACTED].2010.507683. 412 Guidelines for the implementation of mental health workplace  policies and programs for the private sector. Manila: Department of  Labor and Employment; 2020 (https://www.dole.gov.ph/news/do-[PHONE_REDACTED]guidelines-for-the-implementation-of-mental-health-workplacepolicies-and-programs-for-the-private-sector, accessed 28 March 2022). 413 Psychosocial factors at work: recognition and control. Occupational  Safety and Health Series No 56. Geneva: International Labour  Organization; 1986 (https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/194660?ln=en,  accessed 28 March 2022). 414 Nielsen MB, Einarsen S. Outcomes of exposure to workplace  bullying: a meta-analytic review. Work Stress. 2012:26(4):309–332. doi:1 0.1080/[PHONE_REDACTED].2012.734709. 415 Workplace stress: a collective challenge. Geneva: International  Labour Organization; 2016 (https://www.ilo.org/safework/info/ publications/WCMS_466547/lang--en/index.htm, accessed 28 March  2022). 416 SOLVE: integrating health promotion into workplace OSH policies.  Trainers’ guide. Geneva: International Labour Organization; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_protect/---protrav/- --safework/documents/instructionalmaterial/wcms_178397.pdf,  accessed 28 March 2022). 417 Probst TM, Gold D, Caborn J. A preliminary evaluation of SOLVE:  addressing psychosocial problems at work. J Occup Health Psychol.  2008;13(1):32–42. doi:10.1037/[PHONE_REDACTED].13.1.32. 418 Kröll C, Doebler P, Nüesch S. Meta-analytic evidence of the  effectiveness of stress management at work. Eur J Work Organ Psychol.  2017;26:677–693. doi:10.1080/[PHONE_REDACTED]X.2017.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 419 Panagioti M, Panagopoulou E, Bower P, Lewith G, Kontopantelis E,  Chew-Graham C, et al. Controlled interventions to reduce burnout in  physicians: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med.  2017;177:195–205. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.7674. 420 Zafar N, Rotenberg M, Rudnick A. A systematic review of  work accommodations for people with mental disorders. Work.  2019;64(3):461–475. doi:10.3233/WOR-193008. 421 Gayed A, Milligan-Saville JS, Nicholas J, Bryan BT, LaMontagne  AD, Milner A, et al. Effectiveness of training workplace managers to  understand and support the mental health needs of employees:  a systematic review and meta-analysis. Occup Environ Med.  2018;75(6):462–470. doi:10.1136/oemed-[PHONE_REDACTED]. [PHONE_REDACTED]Stratton E, Lampit A, Choi I, Calvo RA, Harvey SB, Glozier N.  Effectiveness of eHealth interventions for reducing mental health  conditions in employees: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS  One. 2017;12(12):e[PHONE_REDACTED]. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 423 Comprehensive mental health service networks: promoting  person-centred and rights-based approaches. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2021 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/341646,  accessed 29 March 2022). 424 Funk M, Drew N, Saraceno B, Caldas de Almeida JM, Agossou T,  Wang X, et al. A framework for mental health policy, legislation and  service development: addressing needs and improving services.  Harvard Health Policy Review. 2005;6:57–69. 425 Kearns M, Muldoon OT, Msetfi RM, Surgenor PWG. The impact  of community-based mental health service provision on stigma  and attitudes towards professional help-seeking. J Mental Health.  2019;28(3):289–295. doi:10.1080/[PHONE_REDACTED].2018.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 426 Leff J, Trieman N. Long-stay patients discharged from psychiatric  hospitals: social and clinical outcomes after five years in the  community. The TAPS Project 46. Br J Psychiatry. 2000;176:217–223.  doi:10.1192/bjp.176.3.217. 427 Framework on integrated, people-centred health services. Sixtyninth World Health Assembly, Geneva, 15 April 2016. Provisional  agenda item 16.1. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2016 (https:// apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/WHA69/A69_39-en.pdf?ua=1,  accessed 29 March 2022). 428 Lewis-Fernández R, Kirmayer LJ. Cultural concepts of distress  and psychiatric disorders: understanding symptom experience and  expression in context. Transcult Psychiatry. 2019;56(4):786–803.  doi:10.1177/[PHONE_REDACTED]. 429 The potential benefits of integrated people-centred health services.  Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021 (https://cdn.who.int/media/ docs/default-source/integrated-health-services-(ihs)/csy/ipchs/ ipchsbenefits.pdf, accessed 29 March 2022). 430 Recovery practices for mental health and well-being: WHO  QualityRights specialized training: course guide. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2019 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/329602,  accessed 29 March 2022). 431 Anthony WA. Recovery from mental illness: the guiding vision of  the mental health service system in the 1990s. Psychosoc Rehab J.  1993;16(4):11–23. doi:10.1037/h[PHONE_REDACTED]. 432 Recovery and the right to health: WHO QualityRights core training:  mental health and social services: course slides. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2019 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/329652,  accessed 29 March 2022). 433 Mueser KT, Corrigan PW, Hilton DW, Tanzman B, Schaub A,  Gingerich S, et al. Illness management and recovery: a review of the  research. Psychiatr Serv. 2002;53(10):1272–1284. doi:10.1176/appi. ps.53.10.[PHONE_REDACTED]Lean M, Fornells-Ambrojo M, Milton A, Lloyd-Evans B,  Harrison-Steward B, Yesufu-Udechuku A, et al. Self-management  interventions for people with severe mental illness: systematic review  and meta-analysis. Br J Psychiatry. 2019;214(5):260–268. doi:10.1192/ bjp.2019.54. 435 Strategies to end seclusion and restraint: WHO QualityRights  Specialized training: course guide. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2019 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/329605,  accessed 29 March 2022). 436 Caldas de Almeida JM, Mateus P, Tomé G. Joint action on mental  health and well-being: towards community-based and socially inclusive  mental health care. Lisbon: The Joint Action for Mental Health and  Wellbeing; 2015 (https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/default/files/mental_ health/docs/2017_towardsmhcare_en.pdf, accessed 29 March 2022). 437 Thornicroft G, Tansella M. The balanced care model for global  mental health. Psychol Med. 2013;43(4):849–863. doi:10.1017/ S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 438 Peer support mental health services: promoting person-centred  and rights-based approaches. Geneva: World Health Organization;  2021 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/[PHONE_REDACTED],  accessed 29 March 2022). 439 Nortje G, Oladeji B, Gureje O, Seedat S. Effectiveness of traditional  healers in treating mental disorders: a systematic review. Lancet  Psychiatry. 2016;3(2):154–170. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 440 Like a death sentence: abuses against persons with mental  disabilities in Ghana. New York: Human Rights Watch; 2012 (https:// www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/ghana1012webwcover.pdf,  accessed 29 March 2022). 441 Van der Watt ASJ, van de Water T, Nortje G, Oladeji BD, Seedat S,  Gureje O, et al. The perceived effectiveness of traditional and faith  healing in the treatment of mental illness: a systematic review of  qualitative studies. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 2018;53(6):555– 566. doi:10.1007/s[PHONE_REDACTED]. 442 Gureje O, Appiah-Poku J, Bello T, Kola L, Araya R, Chisholm D, et  al. Effect of collaborative care between traditional and faith healers  and primary health-care workers on psychosis outcomes in Nigeria  and Ghana (COSIMPO): a cluster randomised controlled trial. Lancet.  2020;[PHONE_REDACTED]:612–622. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 443 Planning and budgeting to deliver services for mental health.  Geneva: World Health Organization; 2003 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/333115, accessed 29 March 2022). 444 World Health Organization. World Health Organization Assessment  Instrument For Mental Health Systems. 2005. 445 Hanlon C, Fekadu A, Jordans M, Kigozi F, Petersen I, Shidhaye R,  et al. District mental healthcare plans for five low-and middle-income  countries: commonalities, variations and evidence gaps. Br J  Psychiatry. 2016;208(S56):S47–S54. doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.114.153767. 446 Together on the road to universal health coverage: a call to action.  Geneva: World Health Organization; 2017 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/258962, accessed 29 March 2022). 447 WHO and Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation. Innovation in  deinstitutionalization: a WHO expert survey. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2014 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/112829,  accessed 29 March 2022). 448 Freeman MC. Global lessons for deinstitutionalisation from  the ill-fated transfer of mental health-care users in Gauteng, South  Africa. Lancet Psychiatry. 2018;5(9):765–768. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 449 Knapp M, Beecham J, McDaid D, Matosevic T, Smith M. The  economic consequences of deinstitutionalisation of mental health  services: lessons from a systematic review of European experience.  Health Soc Care Community. 2011;19(2):113–125. doi:10.1111/j.[PHONE_REDACTED].2010.00969.x. 450 Winkler P, Barrett B, McCrone P, Csémy L, Janous̆ ková M, Höschl C.  Deinstitutionalised patients, homelessness and imprisonment:  systematic review. Br J Psychiatry. 2016;208(5):421–428. doi:10.1192/ bjp.bp.114.161943. 451 Clifford P, Charman A, Webb Y, Craig TJ, Cowan D. Planning for  community care: the Community Placement Questionnaire. Br J Clin  Psychol. 1991;30(3):193–211. doi:10.1111/j.[PHONE_REDACTED].1991.tb00938.x. 452 Lociks de Araújo, C. Mental health system reform in Brazil. Brasília:  Ministério da Saúde; 2016 (https://www.mhinnovation.net/sites/ default/files/downloads/innovation/reports/Brazil_Policy%20Brief_ Final.pdf, accessed 29 March 2022). 453 Ministério da Saúde divulga resultados preliminares de pesquisa  sobre saúde mental na pandemia. In: Governo do Brasil/Notícias  [website]. Brasília: Ministério da Saúde; 2020 (https://www.gov.br/pt-br/ noticias/saude-e-vigilancia-sanitaria/2020/01/investimento-em-saudemental-cresceu-quase-200, accessed 29 March 2022). 454 Barbui C, Papola D, Saraceno B. Forty years without mental  hospitals in Italy. Int J Mental Health Sys. 2018;12(43). doi:10.1186/ s[PHONE_REDACTED]. 455 Mezzina R. Forty years of the Law 180: the aspirations of a great  reform, its successes and continuing need. Epidemiol Psychiatr Sci.  2018;27(4):336–345. doi:10.1017/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 456 Mezzina R. Community mental health care in Trieste and  beyond: an “open door-no restraint” system of care for recovery  and citizenship. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2014;202(6):440–445. doi:10.1097/ NMD.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 457 I servizi di salute mentale territoriali dell’ASUI di Trieste, anno 2018.  Trieste: Dipartimento di Salute Mentale; 2019. 458 Monitoreo de los procesos de atención y adecuación y adecuación  de los hospitales neuropsiquiátricos públicos de la Provincia de Buenos  Aires. Informe año 2021. Buenos Aires: Ministerio de Salud; 2021. [PHONE_REDACTED]Our Results: stopping the depression epidemic in Africa.  In: StrongMinds [website]. Lusaka: StrongMinds; 2022 (https:// strongminds.org/our-impact/, accessed 29 March 2022). 460 Bolton P, Bass J, Neugebauer R, Verdeli H, Clougherty KF,  Wickramaratne P, et al. Group interpersonal psychotherapy for  depression in rural Uganda: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.  2003;[PHONE_REDACTED]:3117–3124. doi:10.1001/jama.289.23.3117. 461 Hamdani SU, Huma Z-E, Masood A, Zhou K, Ahmed Z, Nazier H,  et al. Effect of adding a psychological intervention to routine care of  common mental disorders in a specialized mental healthcare facility  in Pakistan: a randomized controlled trial. Int J Ment Health Syst.  2021;15(1):11. doi:10.1186/s[PHONE_REDACTED]y. 462 Petersen I, Bhana A, Fairal L, Selohilwe O, Kathree T, Baron EC, et al.  Evaluation of a collaborative care model for integrated primary care of  common mental disorders comorbid with chronic conditions in South  Africa. BMC Psychiatry. 2019;19(1):107. doi:10.1186/s[PHONE_REDACTED]z. 463 Joag K, Shields-Zeeman L, Kapadia-Kundu N, Kawade R, Balaji M,  Pathare S. Feasibility and acceptability of a novel community-based  mental health intervention delivered by community volunteers  in Maharashtra, India: the Atmiyata programme. 2020;20(1):48.  doi:10.1186/s[PHONE_REDACTED]z.  464 Community outreach mental health services: promoting  person-centred and rights-based approaches. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2021 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/341644,  accessed 29 March 2022). 465 Bogdanov S, Augustinavicius J, Bass JK, Metz K, Skavenski S,  Singh NS et al. A randomized-controlled trial of community-based  transdiagnostic psychotherapy for veterans and internally displaced  persons in Ukraine. Glob Ment Health (Camb). 2021;8:e32. doi:10.1017/ gmh.2021.27. 466 Bolton P, Lee C, Haroz EE, Murray L, Dorsey S, Robinson C, et al.  A transdiagnostic community-based mental health treatment for  comorbid disorders: development and outcomes of a randomized  controlled trial among Burmese refugees in Thailand. PLoS Med.  2014;11(11):e[PHONE_REDACTED]. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 467 Chibanda D, Weiss HA, Verhey R, Simms V, Munjoma R,  Rusakaniko S, et al. Effect of a primary care-based psychological  intervention on symptoms of common mental disorders in Zimbabwe:  a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2016;[PHONE_REDACTED]:2618–2626. doi:10.1001/ jama.2016.19102. 468 Wallén A, Eberhard S, Landgren K. The experiences of counsellors  offering problem-solving therapy for common mental health issues  at the youth friendship bench in Zimbabwe. Issues Ment Health Nurs.  2021:1–18. doi:10.1080/[PHONE_REDACTED].2021.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 469 Wakefield S, Kellett S, Simmonds-Buckley M, Stockton D,  Bradbury A, Delgadillo J. Improving Access to Psychological Therapies  (IAPT) in the United Kingdom: a systematic review and meta-analysis of  10 years of practice-based evidence. Br J Clin Psychol. 2021;60(1):1–37.  doi:10.1111/bjc.12259. 470 Gualano MR, Bert F, Martorana M, Voglino G, Andriolo V, Thomas R,  et al. The long-term effects of bibliotherapy in depression treatment:  systematic review of randomized clinical trials. Clin Psychol Rev.  2017;58:49–58. doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2017.09.006. 471 Cuijpers P, Noma H, Karyotaki E, Cipriani A, Furukawa T.  Effectiveness and acceptability of cognitive behavior therapy delivery  formats in adults with depression: a network meta-analysis. JAMA  Psychiatry. 2019;76:700–707. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2019.0268. 472 Cuijpers P, Heim E, Abi Ramia J, Burchert S, Carswell K, Cornelisz I,  et al. Effects of a WHO guided digital health intervention for depression  in Syrian refugees in Lebanon: a randomized controlled trial. PLoS Med.  In press. 473 Integrating mental health into primary care: a global  perspective. Geneva: World Health Organization and World  Organization of Family Doctors; 2008 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/43935, accessed 29 March 2022). 474 Primary health care: report of the International Conference  on Primary Health Care, Alma-Ata, USSR. 6–12 September 1978.  Geneva: World Health Organization; 1978 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/39228, accessed 29 March 2022). 475 Coates D, Coppleson D, Schmied V. Integrated physical and  mental healthcare: an overview of models and their evaluation  findings. Int J Evid Based Healthc. 2020;18(1):38–57. doi:10.1097/ XEB.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 476 Cubillos L, Bartels SM, Torrey WC, Naslund J, Uribe-Restrepo JM,  Gaviola C, et al. The effectiveness and cost effectiveness of integrating  mental health services in primary care in low- and middle-income  countries: systematic review. B J Psych Bull. 2021;45(1):40–52.  doi:10.1192/bjb.2020.35. 477 Heath B, Wise Romero P, Reynolds K. A standard framework for  levels of integrated healthcare. Washington D.C: SAMHSA-HRSA Center  for Integrated Health Solutions; 2013 (https://www.pcpcc.org/resource/ standard-framework-levels-integrated-healthcare, accessed 29 March  2022). 478 Patel V, Chisholm D, Parikh R, Charlson FJ, Degenhardt L, Dua T, et  al. Addressing the burden of mental, neurological, and substance use  disorders: key messages from Disease Control Priorities, third  edition.  Lancet. 2016;[PHONE_REDACTED]:1672–1685. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 479 Wakida EK, Talib ZM, Akena D Okello ES, Kinengyere K, Mindra A, et  al. Barriers and facilitators to the integration of mental health services  into primary health care: a systematic review. Syst Rev. 2018;7:211.  doi:10.1186/s[PHONE_REDACTED]. 480 Smith AK. The integration of mental health care in rural Iran. Iranian  Studies. 2020; 53(1–2):93–111. doi:10.1080/[PHONE_REDACTED].2019.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 481 mhGAP Humanitarian Intervention Guide (mhGAP-HIG): clinical  management of mental, neurological and substance use conditions  in humanitarian emergencies. Geneva: World Health Organization;  2015 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/162960, accessed 29  March 2022). 482 Stories of change in four countries: building capacity for integrating  mental health care. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021 (https:// apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/349939, accessed 29 March 2022). 483 Luitel NP, Breuer E, Adhikari A, Kohrt BA, Lund C, Komproe IH, et  al. Process evaluation of a district mental healthcare plan in Nepal: a  mixed-methods case study. BJPsych Open. 2020;6(4):e77. doi:10.1192/ bjo.2020.60. 484 Kahiloğulları AK, Alataş E, Ertuğrul F, Malaj A. Responding to mental  health needs of Syrian refugees in Turkey: mhGAP training impact  assessment. Int J Ment Health Syst. 2020;14(1):84. doi:10.1186/s[PHONE_REDACTED]. 485 Unützer J, Carlo AD, Collins PY. Leveraging collaborative care  to improve access to mental health care on a global scale. World  Psychiatry. 2020;19(1):36–37. doi:10.1002/wps.20696. 486 Ali MK, Chwastiak L, Poongothai S, Emmert-Fees KMF, Patel SA,  Mohan Anjana R, et al. Effect of a collaborative care model on  depressive symptoms and glycated hemoglobin, blood pressure,  and serum cholesterol among patients with depression and diabetes  in India: the INDEPENDENT randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2020.  18;324(7):651–662. doi:10.1001/jama.2020.11747. 487 Rimal P, Choudhury N, Agrawal P, Basnet M, Bohara B, Citrin D,  et al. Collaborative care model for depression in rural Nepal: a mixed  methods implementation research study. BMJ Open. 2021;11:e048481.  doi:10.1136/bmjopen-[PHONE_REDACTED]. 488 Araya R, Flynn T, Rojas G, Fritsch R, Simon G. Cost-effectiveness  of a primary care treatment program for depression in low-income  women in Santiago, Chile. Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163(8):1379–1387.  doi:10.1176/ajp.2006.163.8.1379. 489 Chuah FLH, Haldane VE, Cervero-Liceras F, Ong SE, Sigfrid LA,  Murphy G, et al. Interventions and approaches to integrating HIV  and mental health services: a systematic review. Health Policy Plan.  2017;32(Suppl4):iv27–iv47. doi:10.1093/heapol/czw169. 490 Simas TAM, Flynn MP, Kroll-Desrosiers AR, Carvalho SM, Levin LL,  Beibel K, et al. A systematic review of integrated care interventions  addressing perinatal depression care in ambulatory obstetric care  settings. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 2018;61(3):573–590. doi:10.1097/ GRF.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 491 End Inequalities, End AIDS. Global AIDS Strategy 2021–2026.  Geneva: UN AIDS; 2021 (https://www.unaids.org/en/resources/ documents/2021/[PHONE_REDACTED]global-AIDS-strategy, accessed 29 March  2022). [PHONE_REDACTED]Nakimul-Mpungu E, Musisi S, Wamala K, Okello J, Ndyanabangi S,  Birungi J, et al. Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of group support  psychotherapy delivered by trained lay health workers for depression  treatment among people with HIV in Uganda: a cluster-randomised  trial. Lancet Glob Health. 2020;8(3):E387–E398. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]X([PHONE_REDACTED]. 493 Pasha A, Siddiqui H, Ali S, Brooks MB, Maqbool NR,  Khan AJ. Impact of integrating mental health services within  existing tuberculosis treatment facilities. J Med Access. 2021;5.  doi:10.1177/[PHONE_REDACTED]. 494 Bending the curve: the impact of integrating mental health  services on HIV and TB outcomes. London: United for Global Mental  Health; 2021 (https://unitedgmh.org/bending-curve-hiv, accessed 29  March 2022). 495 Mahomed OH, Asmall S, Freeman M. An integrated chronic  disease management model: a diagonal approach to health system  strengthening in South Africa. J Health Care Poor Underserved.  2014;25(4):1723–1729. doi:10.1353/hpu.2014.0176. 496 Carbone NB, Njala J, Jackson DJ, Eliya MT, Chilangwa C, Tseka J,  et al. “I would love if there was a young woman to encourage us, to  ease our anxiety which we would have if we were alone”: adapting the  Mothers2Mothers Mentor Mother Model for adolescent mothers living  with HIV in Malawi. PLoS One. 2019;14(6):e02176. doi:10.1371/journal. pone.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 497 Burger M, Hoosain M, Einspieler C, Unger M, Niehaus D. Maternal  perinatal mental health and infant and toddler neurodevelopment –  evidence from low and middle-income countries. A systematic review. J  Affect Disord. 2020;268:[PHONE_REDACTED]. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2020.03.023. 498 Morrell CJ, Slade P, Warner R, Paley G, Dixon S, Walters SJ, et  al. Clinical effectiveness of health visitor training in psychologically  informed approaches for depression in postnatal women: pragmatic  cluster randomised trial in primary care. BMJ. 2009;338:a3045.  doi:10.1136/bmj.a3045. 499 Nakku JEM, Nalwadda O, Garman E, Honikman S, Hanlon C,  Kigozi F, et al. Group problem solving therapy for perinatal depression  in primary health care settings in rural Uganda: an intervention cohort  study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2021;21(1):584. doi:10.1186/s[PHONE_REDACTED]. 500 Hospital-based mental health services: promoting person-centred  and rights-based approaches. Geneva: World Health Organization; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/341647, 29 March 2022). 501 Plan Nacional de Salud Mental: República Dominicana 2019–2022.  Santo Domingo: Ministerio de Salud Pública; 2019 (https://repositorio. msp.gob.do/handle/[PHONE_REDACTED]/1660, accessed 29 March 2022). 502 Centros de Salud Mental Comunitaria (CSMC) In: Peru Ministerio de  Salud [website]. Lima: Peru Ministry of Health; 2017 (http://bvs.minsa. gob.pe/local/MINSA/4499.pdf, accessed 29 March 2022). 503 Community mental health centres: promoting person-centred  and rights-based approaches. Geneva: World Health Organization;  2021 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/341642, accessed 29  March 2022). 504 Singh SP, Javed A. Early intervention in psychosis in low- and  middle-income countries: a WPA initiative. World Psychiatry.  2020;19(1):122 –122. doi:10.1002/wps.20708. 505 A global framework for youth mental health: investing in future  mental capital for individuals, communities and economies. Geneva:  World Economic Forum; 2020 (https://www.orygen.org.au/About/ Orygen-Global/Files/Orygen-WEF-global-framework-for-youthmental-healt.aspx, accessed 29 March 2022). 506 EPPIC (Early Psychosis Prevention & Intervention Centre). In:  Orygen Youth Health [website]. Melbourne: Orygen Youth Health; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://oyh.org.au/our-services/clinical-program/continuing-careteams/eppic-early-psychosis-prevention-intervention, accessed 29  March 2022). 507 Malone D, Marriott SVL, Newton-Howes G, Simmonds S, Tyrer P.  Community mental health teams (CMHTs) for people with severe  mental illnesses and disordered personality. Cochrane Database Syst  Rev. 2007;3:CD000270. doi:10.1002/[PHONE_REDACTED].CD000270.pub2. 508 Thorning H, Dixon L. Forty-five years later: the challenge of  optimizing assertive community treatment. Curr Opin Psychiatry.  2020;33(4):397–406. doi:10.1097/YCO.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 509 Peer support groups by and for people with lived experience: WHO  QualityRights guidance module: module slides. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2019 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/329644,  accessed 29 March 2022). 510 Mental health helplines and resources [website]. Kuala Lumpar:  AIA Malaysia; 2021 (https://www.aia.com.my/en/what-matters/ seetheotherside/mental-health-helpline-resources.html, accessed 29  March 2022). 511 Kaos J. COVID-19: Health Ministry’s support hotline receives over  100,000 calls seeking counselling. The Star. 25 June 2021 (https://www. thestar.com.my/news/nation/2021/06/25/covid-19-health-ministryssupport-hotline-receives-over-[PHONE_REDACTED]calls-seeking-counselling,  accessed 29 March 2022). 512 Zhou W, Ouyang F, Nergui OE, Bangura JB, Acheampong K,  Massey IY, et al. Child and adolescent mental health policy in low-  and middle-income countries: challenges and lessons for policy  development and implementation. Front Psychiatry. 2020;11:150.  doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2020.00150. 513 Headspace [website]. Melbourne and Cophenhagen: Headspace;  2022 (https://headspace.org.au/ and https://headspace.dk/en,  accessed 29 March 2022). 514 Rickwood D, Paraskakis M, Quin D, Hobbs N, Ryall V, Trethowan J,  et al. Australia’s innovation in youth mental health care: the headspace  centre model. Early Interv Psychiatry. 2019;13(1):159–166. doi:10.1111/ eip.12740. 515 Parikh SV, Taubman DS, Antoun C, Cranford J, Foster CE,  Grambeau M, et al. The Michigan peer-to-peer depression awareness  program: school-based prevention to address depression among teens.  Psychiatr Serv. 2018;69(4):487–491. doi:10.1176/appi.ps.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 516 Peer support groups. In: USP Kenya [website]. Nairobi: Users and  Survivors of Psychiatry Kenya; 2022 (https://www.uspkenya.org/peersupport-groups/, accessed 29 March 2022). 517 Psychosocial rehabilitation: a consensus statement. Geneva:  World Health Organization; 1996 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/60630, accessed 29 March 2022). 518 Community-based rehabilitation: CBR guidelines. Geneva:  World Health Organization, UNESCO, International Labour  Organization & International Disability Development Consortium;  2010 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/44405, accessed 29  March 2022). 519 McKay C, Nugent KL, Johnsen M, Eaton WW, Lidz CW. A systematic  review of evidence for the clubhouse model of psychosocial  rehabilitation. Adm Policy Ment Health. 2018;45:28–47. doi:10.1007/ s[PHONE_REDACTED]. 520 Pardi J, Willis M. How young adults in London experience the  clubhouse model of mental health recovery: a thematic analysis.  J Psychosoc Rehabil Ment Health. 2018;5:169–182. doi:10.1007/ s[PHONE_REDACTED]. 521 Chatterjee S, Patel V, Chatterjee A, Weiss HA. Evaluation of a  community-based rehabilitation model for chronic schizophrenia in  rural India. Br J Psychiatry. 2003;182(1):57–62. doi:10.1192/bjp.182.1.57. 522 Chatterjee S, Pillai A, Jain S, Cohen A, Patel V. Outcomes of  people with psychotic disorders in a community-based rehabilitation  programme in rural India. Br J Psychiatry. 2009;195(5):433–439.  doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.108.057596. 523 Guerrero AVP, Bessoni EA, Cardoso AJC, Vaz BC, Braga-Campos FC,  Badaró MIM. De Volta para Casa programme (Back Home programme)  in its beneficiaries’ daily lives. Saúde Soc São Paulo. 2019;28(3):11–20.  doi:10.1590/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 524 Personal health budgets for mental health. In: National Health  Service [website]. London; National Health Service; 2022 (https://www. england.nhs.uk/personal-health-budgets/personal-health-budgets-formental-health/, accessed 29 March 2022). 525 Sivakumar T, Thirthalli J, Gangadhar BN. Rehabilitation of longstay patients in state mental hospitals: role for social welfare sector.  Indian J Psychiatry. 2020;62(2):202–206. doi:10.4103/psychiatry. IndianJPsychiatry_332_19. 526 Fakhoury W, Priebe S. Deinstitutionalization and  reinstitutionalization: major changes in the provision of mental  healthcare. Psychiatry. 2007;6(8):313–316. doi:10.1016/j. mppsy.2007.05.008. [PHONE_REDACTED]Supported living services for mental health: promoting  person-centred and rights-based approaches. Geneva: World  Health Organization; 2021 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/ item/[PHONE_REDACTED], accessed 29 March 2022). 528 Delivering support in Housing First. In: Housing First Europe  Hub [website]. Brussels: Housing First Europe Hub; 2022 (https:// housingfirsteurope.eu/guide/delivering-support-housing-first/,  accessed 29 March 2022). 529 Baxter AJ, Tweed EJ, Vittal Katikireddi S, Thomson H. Effects  of Housing First approaches on health and well-being of adults  who are homeless or at risk of homelessness: systematic review  and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. J Epidemiol  Community Health. 2019;73(5):379–387. doi:10.1136/jech-[PHONE_REDACTED]. 530 Woodhall-Melnik JR, Dunn JR. A systematic review of outcomes  associated with participation in Housing First programs. Housing  Studies. 2016;31(3):287–304. doi:10.1080/[PHONE_REDACTED].2015.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 531 Becker KD, Brandt NE, Stephan SH, Chorpita BF. A review of  educational outcomes in the children’s mental health treatment  literature. Adv School Ment Health Promotion. 2014;7(1):5–23. doi:10.10 80/[PHONE_REDACTED]X.2013.851980. 532 Kase C, Hoover S, Boyd G, West KD, Dubenitz J, Trivedi PA, et  al. Educational outcomes associated with school behavioral health  interventions: a review of the literature. J Sch Health. 2017;87(7):554– 562. doi:10.1111/josh.12524. 533 WHO guideline on school health services. Geneva: World  Health Organization and UNESCO; 2021 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/341910, accessed 29 March 2022). 534 Lim CG, Loh H, Renjan V, Tan J. Child community mental health  services in Asia Pacific and Singapore’s REACH model. Brain Sci.  2017;7(10):126. doi:10.3390/brainsci[PHONE_REDACTED]. 535 Baranyi G, Scholl C, Fazel S, Patel V, Priebe S, Mundt AP. Severe  mental illness and substance use disorders in prisoners in low-income  and middle-income countries: a systematic review and meta-analysis  of prevalence studies. Lancet Glob Health. 2019;7(4):e461–e471.  doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]X([PHONE_REDACTED].  536 A/HRC/32/32. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the  right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable  standard of physical and mental health. In: Thirty-second session  of the Human Rights Council; Agenda item 3. Promotion and  protection of all human rights, civil, political, economic, social  and cultural rights, including the right to development. New York:  United Nations General Assembly; 2016 (https://undocs.org/A/ HRC/32/32, accessed 29 March 2022). 537 Our hearts have gone dark: the mental health impact of  South Sudan’s conflict. London: Amnesty International; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://www.amnesty.org/en/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/ AFR[PHONE_REDACTED]ENGLISH.pdf, accessed 29 March 2022). 538 Sampson S, Edworthy R, Völlm B, Bulten E. Long-term forensic  mental health services: an exploratory comparison of 18 European  countries. Int J Forensic Ment Health. 2016;15(4):1–19. doi:10.1080/[PHONE_REDACTED].2016.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 539 Gureje O, Abdulmalik J. Severe mental disorders among prisoners  in low-income and middle-income countries: reaching the difficult to  reach. Lancet Glob Health. 2019;7(4):e392–e393. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]X([PHONE_REDACTED]. 540 Essential services package for women and girls subject to  violence module 4: social services. New York: United Nations  Population Fund; 2015 (https://www.unfpa.org/resources/essentialservices-package-women-and-girls-subject-violence-module-4,  accessed 29 March 2022). 541 IASC guidelines on mental health and psychosocial support  in emergency settings. Geneva: Inter-Agency Standing Committee;  2007 (https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/iasc-task-forcemental-health-and-psychosocial-support-emergency-settings/iascguidelines-mental-health-and-psychosocial-support-emergencysettings-2007, accessed 29 March 2022). 542 The Sphere handbook: humanitarian charter and minimum  standards in humanitarian response, fourth edition. Geneva: Sphere  Association; 2018 (www.spherestandards.org/handbook, accessed 29  March 2022). 543 Early childhood development and disability: a discussion paper.  Geneva: World Health Organization and UNICEF; 2012 (https://apps. who.int/iris/handle/10665/75355, accessed 29 March 2022). 544 Hale DR, Bevilacqua L, Viner RM. Adolescent health and adult  education and employment: a systematic review. Pediatrics  2015;136(1):128–140. doi:10.1542/peds.[PHONE_REDACTED]. 545 Ringeisen H, Langer Ellison M, Ryder-Burge A, Biebel K,  Alikhan S, Jones E. Supported education for individuals with psychiatric  disabilities: state of the practice and policy implications. Psychiatr  Rehabil J. 2017;40(2):197–206. doi:10.1037/prj[PHONE_REDACTED]. 546 Thornicroft G, Brohan E, Rose D, Sartorius N, Leese M. Global  pattern of experienced and anticipated discrimination against  people with schizophrenia: a cross-sectional survey. Lancet.  2009;[PHONE_REDACTED]:408–415. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 547 Crowther RE, Marshall M, Bond GR, Huxley P. Helping people  with severe mental illness to obtain work: systematic review. BMJ.  2001;[PHONE_REDACTED]:204–208. doi:10.1136/bmj.322.7280.204. 548 Community Recovery Achieved Through Entrepreneurism  (CREATE). In: Grand Challenges Canada/Innovations [website]. Toronto:  Grand Challenges Canada; 2016 (https://www.grandchallenges.ca/ grantee-stars/[PHONE_REDACTED]/, accessed 29 March 2022). 549 Cohen A, Raja S, Underhill C, Yaro BP, Dokurugu AY, de Silva M, et al.  Sitting with others: mental health self-help groups in northern Ghana.  Int J Ment Health Syst. 2012;6(1):1. doi:10.1186/[PHONE_REDACTED]. 550 Galloway A, Boland B, Williams G. Mental health problems,  benefits and tackling discrimination. BJPsych Bull. 2018;42(5):200–205.  doi:10.1192/bjb.2018.43. 551 Pybus K, Pickett KE, Prady SL, Lloyd C, Wilkinson R. Discrediting  experiences: outcomes of eligibility assessments for claimants with  psychiatric compared with non-psychiatric conditions transferring  to personal independence payments in England. BJPsych Open.  2019;5(E19):1–5. doi:10.1192/bjo.2019.3. 552 The benefits assault course: making the UK benefits system  more accessible for people with mental health problems. London:  Money and Mental Health Policy Institute; 2019 (https://www. moneyandmentalhealth.org/publications/benefits/, accessed 29 March  2022). 553 Senior SL, Caan W, Gamsu M. Welfare and well-being: towards  mental health-promoting welfare systems. Br J Psychiatry.  2020;216(1):4–5. doi:10.1192/bjp.2019.242. 554 Lund C, De Silva M, Plagerson S, Cooper S, Chisholm D, Das J, et  al. Poverty and mental disorders: breaking the cycle in low-income  and middle-income countries. Lancet. 2011;[PHONE_REDACTED]:1502–1514.  doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]X. 555 McGuire J, Kaiser C, Bach-Mortensen AM. A systematic review and  meta-analysis of the impact of cash transfers on subjective well-being  and mental health in low- and middle-income countries. Nat Hum  Behav. 2022;6(3):359–370. doi:10.1038/s[PHONE_REDACTED]z. 556 Zimmerman A, Garman E, Avendano-Pabom M, Araya R, Lacko S,  McDaid D, et al. The impact of cash transfers on mental health in  children and young people in low-income and middle-income  countries: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ Glob Health.  2021;6(4):e004661. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-[PHONE_REDACTED]. 557 Fernald LCH, Gertler PJ, Neufeld LM. Role of cash in conditional  cash transfer programmes for child health, growth, and development:  an analysis of Mexico’s Oportunidades. Lancet. 2008;371:828–837.  doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. 558 Webber M, Treacy S, Carr S, Clark M, Parker G. The effectiveness of  personal budgets for people with mental health problems: a systematic  review. J Ment Health. 2014;23(3):146–155. doi:10.3109/[PHONE_REDACTED].201 4.910642. 559 Ljungqvist I, Topor A, Forssell H, Svensson I, Davidson L. Money and  mental illness: a study of the relationship between poverty and serious  psychological problems. Community Ment Health J. 2015;52:842–850.  doi:10.1007/s[PHONE_REDACTED]. 560 Oliveira Alves FJ, Borges Machado D, Barreto ML. Effect of the  Brazilian cash transfer programme on suicide rates: a longitudinal  analysis of the Brazilian municipalities. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr  Epidemiol. 2019;54(5):599–606. doi:10.1007/s[PHONE_REDACTED]. [PHONE_REDACTED]Angeles G, de Hoop J, Handa S, Kilburn K, Milazzo A, Peterman A.  Government of Malawi’s unconditional cash transfer improves youth  mental health. Social Science & Medicine. 2019;225:108–119.  doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2019.01.037. 562 Kilburn K, Thirumurthy H, Halpern CT, Pettifor A, Handa S. Effects  of a large-scale unconditional cash transfer program on mental health  outcomes of young people in Kenya. Adolesc Health. 2016;58(2):223– 229. doi:10.1016/j.jadohealth.2015.09.023. 563 Powell-Jackson T, Pereira SK, Dutt V, Tougher S, Haldar K,  Kumar P. Cash transfers, maternal depression and emotional wellbeing: Quasi-experimental evidence from India’s Janani Suraksha  Yojana programme. Soc Sci Med. 2016;162:210–218. doi:10.1016/j. socscimed.2016.06.034. PHOTO CREDITS Cover: iStock.com / Vardhan. Page XI: iStock.com / kupicoo. Page 1: Unsplash / Bennett Tobias. Page 4: iStock.com / rupaghosh. Page 9: iStock.com / FG Trade. Page  17: WHO / A Bhatiasevi. Page 27: WHO / Cheppel Volodymyr. Page 28: WHO Country Office Syria. Page 35: iStock.com / zms. Page 39: Adobe Stock / littlewolf1989.  Page 42: Adobe Stock / lalalululala. Page 46: iStock.com / FatCamera. Page 64: Médecins Sans Frontières / Giulio Rimondi. Page 69: Adobe Stock / icsnaps. Page 74:  WHO / NOOR / Sebastian Liste. Page 78: WHO / Tatiana Almeida. Page 90: WHO / Karen Reidy. Page 95: WHO / Blink Media - Daiana Valencia. Page 103: iStock.com /  FG Trade. Page 106: iStock.com / Halfpoint. Page 112: WHO / Yoshi Shimizu. Page 129: iStock.com / GIACOMO MORINI. Page 145: WHO Country Office Syria. Page 147:  Adobe Stock / Art_Photo. Page 162: WHO / Karen Reidy. Page 167: iStock.com / Edwin Tan. Page 174: iStock.com / FatCamera. Page 178: WHO Country Office Ukraine.  Page 184: istock.com / Hispanolistic. Page 187: Adobe Stock / dundanim. Page 203: Getty Image / Hindustan Times / Contributor. Page 205: Adobe Stock / Rawpixel. com. Page 206: StrongMinds. Page 213: WHO / Jonathan Perugia. Page 221: istock.com / FG Trade. Page 222: WHO / NOOR / Sebastian Liste. Page 225: WHO / Conor  Ashleigh. Page 228: WHO / Agata Grzybowska / RATS Agency. Page 232: WHO / Alison Brunier. Page 235: WHO / NOOR / Arko Datto. Page 247: istock.com / damircudic.  Page 253: istock.com / FG Trade. ICONS  Icons made by Freepik from www.flaticon.com 272

Mental health is critically important to everyone, everywhere.  All over the world, mental health needs are high but  responses are insufficient and inadequate. The World mental  health report: transforming mental health for all is designed  to inspire and inform better mental health for everyone  everywhere. Drawing on the latest evidence available,  showcasing examples of good practice from around the  world, and voicing people’s lived experience, it highlights  why and where change is most needed and how it can best  be achieved. It calls on all stakeholders to work together to  deepen the value and commitment given to mental health,  reshape the environments that influence mental health, and  strengthen the systems that care for mental health.  Department of Mental Health and Substance Use World Health Organization 20 Avenue Appia 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland https://www.who.int/health-topics/mental-health