WHO guidelines on  mental health at work 

WHO guidelines on  mental health at work

WHO guidelines on mental health at work ISBN [PHONE_REDACTED]electronic version) ISBN [PHONE_REDACTED]print version) © World Health Organization 2022 Some rights reserved. This work is available under the Creative  Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO licence  (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO; https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-ncsa/3.0/igo).  Under the terms of this licence, you may copy, redistribute and  adapt the work for non-commercial purposes, provided the work is  appropriately cited, as indicated below. In any use of this work, there  should be no suggestion that WHO endorses any specific organization,  products or services. The use of the WHO logo is not permitted. If you  adapt the work, then you must license your work under the same or  equivalent Creative Commons licence. If you create a translation of  this work, you should add the following disclaimer along with the  suggested citation: “This translation was not created by the World  Health Organization (WHO). WHO is not responsible for the content or  accuracy of this translation. The original English edition shall be the  binding and authentic edition”.  Any mediation relating to disputes arising under the licence shall  be conducted in accordance with the mediation rules of the World  Intellectual Property Organization (http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/ mediation/rules/). Suggested citation WHO guidelines on mental health at work.  Geneva: World Health Organization; 2022. Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0  IGO. Cataloguing-in-Publication (CIP) data. CIP data are available at  http://apps.who.int/iris. Sales, rights and licensing. To purchase WHO publications, see http:// apps.who.int/bookorders. To submit requests for commercial use and  queries on rights and licensing, see https://www.who.int/copyright. Third-party materials. If you wish to reuse material from this work  that is attributed to a third party, such as tables, figures or images, it  is your responsibility to determine whether permission is needed for  that reuse and to obtain permission from the copyright holder. The  risk of claims resulting from infringement of any third-party-owned  component in the work rests solely with the user. General disclaimers. The designations employed and the  presentation of the material in this publication do not imply  the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of WHO  concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or  of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or  boundaries. Dotted and dashed lines on maps represent approximate  border lines for which there may not yet be full agreement. The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’  products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended  by WHO in preference to others of a similar nature that are not  mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary  products are distinguished by initial capital letters. All reasonable precautions have been taken by WHO to verify the  information contained in this publication. However, the published  material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either  expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use  of the material lies with the reader. In no event shall WHO be liable for  damages arising from its use.  Credit for cover photos (in this order):  NOOR / Sebastian Liste, WHO,   Blink Media - Hannah Reyes Morales.  Graphic design and layout: Kellie Hopley Design Ltd.

             iii Contents Foreword	 ..................................................................................................................      v Acknowledgements	   ...............................................................................................     vi Abbreviations	 ............................................................................................................. vii Executive summary	 ................................................................................................  ix Introduction	 .............................................................................................................   1	 Background	 ........................................................................................................................      2	 Scope of the guidelines	 ..........................................................................................................      5 Method: How the guidelines were developed     ....................................... 8 Recommendations      ................................................................................................... 9	 Recommendations for organizational interventions      ......................................       11 Recommendations for training managers ......................................      25	 Recommendations for training workers              .........................................................      35	 Recommendations for individual interventions           ..........................................      43	 Recommendations for returning to work after absence  associated with mental health conditions 	         .......................................................      57 	 Recommendations for gaining employment  for people living with mental health conditions               ........................................      63

Key question 13:  Screening programmes	 ...............................................     69 Research gaps	       ........................................................................................................ 73

iv Dissemination and update of the guidelines	     ............................................................  79 References       ......................................................................................................................................... 82 Glossary       ................................................................................................................................................ 91 Annex 1. Contributors to the guidelines         .................................................................... 95 Annex 2. Managing declarations of interest and conflicts of interest    ......     105 Annex 3. Developing the scope, key questions and outcomes	         ..................     109 Annex 4. Reviewing the evidence and supporting evidence      .........................    113 Annex 5. Developing the recommendations	         ..........................................................     116 Annex 6. Drafting the guideline and external review       .........................................    117 Web Annex: Evidence profiles and supporting evidence https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/[PHONE_REDACTED]Soumya Swaminathan WHO Chief Scientist              v Foreword Working people, like all people, deserve an inherent right to the highest attainable standard of mental health at work, regardless  of their type of employment. And people living with mental health conditions have a right to access, participate and thrive in  work. Governments and employers have a responsibility to uphold that right by providing work that simultaneously prevents  workers from experiencing excessive stress and mental health risks; protects and promotes workers’ mental health and wellbeing; and supports people to fully and effectively participate in the workforce, free from stigma, discrimination or abuse. Yet the world of work is changing. Across the globe, technology, globalization, demographic shifts, emergencies and climate  change are reshaping how and where we work. The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted labour markets and accelerated the pace  of change – especially in remote work, e-commerce and automation. Some jobs are being lost; some are being created; almost  all are changing. For many, these changes are creating new pressures or exacerbating existing stresses around work that have the  potential to undermine workers’ mental health. Addressing mental health at work effectively will help prepare for the future of work and a changing world. Managing mental health at work can appear challenging. But it should not be seen as onerous. Rather, it offers an opportunity  for growth and sustainable development. Safe, healthy and inclusive workplaces not only enhance mental and physical health  but likely also reduce absenteeism, improve work performance and productivity, boost staff morale and motivation, and  minimize conflict between colleagues. When people have good mental health, they are better able to cope with the stresses of  life, realize their own abilities, learn and work well and contribute actively to their communities. And when people have good  working conditions, their mental health is protected. These guidelines provide evidence-based recommendations on interventions that can be implemented to better prevent,  protect and promote, and support the mental health of workers. It highlights the importance of organizational interventions,  manager and worker training and interventions for individuals. Particular attention is given to workers living with mental health  conditions and the interventions that can be used to support them to gain employment, return to work following an absence or  to be supported by reasonable accommodations at work. The World Health Organization (WHO) is committed to supporting Member States to promote and protect the mental health  of workers. Indeed, the Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030 emphasizes the need for countries to promote  safe, supportive and decent working conditions for all. The WHO Global Strategy on Health, Environment and Climate Change  identifies workplaces as an essential setting for the prevention of a range of modifiable risks, particularly for non-communicable  diseases. These guidelines mark a milestone in leveraging workplaces as a platform for action, providing a framework for the  evidence-based action required to ensure effective prevention, promotion and support for mental health at work. In all countries and across sectors, the wealth of enterprises and societies depends on the mental health of workers. We encourage governments, enterprises and all stakeholders in the world of work to use and implement these guidelines as an  effective tool for securing safe, healthy and inclusive workplaces that promote and protect mental health.

vi Acknowledgements The WHO guidelines on mental health at work was prepared  by the World Health Organization (WHO) Department of  Mental Health and Substance Use and the Department  of Health, Environment and Climate Change under the  leadership of Dévora Kestel and Maria Neira, respectively.   Responsible Technical Officer: Aiysha Malik, Mental Health  Unit, Department of Mental Health and Substance Use, WHO.   WHO Steering Group members:  Faten Ben Abdelaziz  (Department of Health Promotion), Alex Butchart (Department  of Social Determinants of Health), Alarcos Cieza (Department of  Noncommunicable Diseases), Ivan Ivanov (Department of Health,  Environment and Climate Change), Catherine Kane (Health  Workforce Department), Hyo-Jeong Kim (Department of Health  Emergency Interventions), Aiysha Malik (Department of Mental  Health and Substance Use) and Juana Willumsen (Department of  Health Promotion). The Steering Group was chaired by Mark van  Ommeren (Department of Mental Health and Substance Use).  The authors would like to express our gratitude to: Rebekah  Thomas-Boscoe from the WHO Guideline Review Committee  Secretariat for her technical support throughout the guidelines  development process; and Evelyn Finger and Anne Sikanda,  from the Department of Mental Health Substance Use who  provided crucial administrative support. WHO colleagues who  provided inputs at various stages of development were: Florence  Baingana (WHO Regional Office for Africa); Renato Oliveira e  Souza, Claudina Cayetano (Pan American Health Organization);  Nazneen Anwar (WHO Country Office, Maldives); Khalid Saeed  (WHO Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean); Natalie  Drew Bold, Kenneth Carswell, Alexandra Fleischmann (WHO  Department of Mental Health and Substance Use); and Martin  Vandendyck (WHO Regional Office for the Western Pacific).  Sincere appreciation is extended to the following consultants  who supported various technical aspects throughout the  development: Aemal Akhtar (Denmark), Gergö Baranyi (United  Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland), Chiara Gastaldon  (Italy), Sherianne Kramer (South Africa), Georgia Michlig (United  States of America), Susan Norris (USA), Davide Papola (Italy).   WHO acknowledges the technical contribution from colleagues  of the International Labour Organization (ILO) and particularly  Manal Azzi of ILO headquarters, Geneva, Switzerland.  Guideline Development Group (GDG): WHO would like  to thank the members of the GDG for their commitment,  enthusiasm and expertise. The GDG members were: Jose Luis  Ayuso-Mateos (Autonomous University of Madrid, Spain),  Mirai Chatterjee (Self-Employed Women’s Association,  India), Capucine de Fouchier (Specialist in mental health  and psychosocial support, Switzerland), Samuel Harvey  (Black Dog institute, Australia), Hiroto Ito (Tohoku Medical  and Pharmaceutical University, Japan), Norito Kawakami  (The University of Tokyo, Japan), Nour Kik (National Mental  Health Programme, Ministry of Public Health, Lebanon), Spo  Kgalamono (National Institute for Occupational Health, South  Africa), Margaret Kitt (National Institute for Occupational  Safety and Health, USA), Anthony D. LaMontagne (Deakin  University, Australia), Sapna Mahajan (Genomics Canada,  Canada), Kazem Malakouti (Iran University of Medical  Sciences, Iran), Karina Nielsen (The University of Sheffield,  United Kingdom), Pratap Sharan (All India Institute of Medical  Sciences, India), Katherine Sorsdahl (University of Cape Town,  South Africa) and Graham Thornicroft (Kings College London,  United Kingdom). Guideline methodologist: WHO extends tremendous  gratitude to: Corrado Barbui, University of Verona, Italy. External Review Group (ERG): WHO is grateful for the  contributions of the following individuals who provided  peer-review of the draft guidelines: Atalay Alem (Addis  Ababa University, Ethiopia), Fabrice Althaus (International  Committee of the Red Cross, Switzerland), Lamia Bouzgarrou  (University of Monastir, Tunisia), Marc Corbière (University  of Quebec in Montreal, Canada), Premilla D’Cruz (Indian  Institute of Management Ahmedabad, India), Carolyn  Dewa (University of California, Davis, USA), Frida Marina  Fischer (University of São Paulo, Brazil), Roshan Galvaan  (University of Cape Town, South Africa), Nick Glozier 

             vii (University of Sydney, Australia), Neil Greenberg (King’s  College London, United Kingdom), Birgit Greiner (University  College Cork, Ireland), Nadine Harker (South African Medical  Research Council, South Africa), Nina Hedegaard Nielsen  (Independent psychosocial risks expert, Denmark), Ehimare  Iden (Occupational Health and Safety Managers, Nigeria),  Inah Kim (Hanyang University College of Medicine, Republic  of Korea), George Leveridge (Jamaica Constabulary Force,  Jamaica), Shuang Li (National Institute for Occupational  Health and Poison Control, China), Elizabeth Linos  (University of California, Berkeley, USA), Ed Mantler (Mental  Health Commission of Canada), Angela Martin (University  of Tasmania, Australia), Christina Maslach (University of  California- Berkeley, USA), Álvaro Roberto Crespo Merlo  (Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil), María Elisa  Ansoleaga Moreno (Universidad Diego Portales, Chile),  Reiner Rugulies (National Research Centre for the Working  Environment, Denmark), Godfrey Zari Rukundo (Mbara  University of Science and Technology, Uganda), Kamalesh  Sarkar (National Institute of Occupational Health, India),  Vandad Sharifi (Tehran University of Medical Sciences,  Iran), João Silvestre da Silva-Junior (São Camilo University  Center, Brazil), JianLi Wang (Dalhousie University, Canada),  Mohammad Taghi Yasamy (Shahid Beheshti University of  Medical Sciences, Iran) and Dieter Zapf (Goethe University  Frankfurt, Germany). Representatives of their respective  organizations and key stakeholders were: Melissa Pitotti  (Core Humanitarian Standard [CHS] Alliance); Sarah Copsey,  Julia Flintrop (European Agency for Safety and Health at  Work [EU-OSHA]); Olga Kalina, Guadalupe Morales Cano  (European Network of (Ex)Users and Survivors of Psychiatry  [ENUSP]); Claudia Sartor (Global Mental Health Peer Network  [GMHPN]); Madeline A. Naegle (International Council of  Nurses [ICN]); Pierre Vincensini (International Organisation  of Employers [IOE]); Rory O’Neill (International Trade Union  Confederation [ITUC]); Victor Ugo (Mentally Aware Nigeria  Initiative [MANI]); Miguel R. Jorge (World Medical Association  [WMA]); and Rose Boucaut, Salam Alexis Gomez, Jepkemoi  Joanne Kibet, Norma Elisa Gálvez Olvera, Claudia Patricia  Rojas Silva (World Physiotherapy [WP]). WHO also extends  its thanks to the World Health Professions Alliance for  supporting the identification of its members, in particular  Helen von Dadelszen and Howard Catton.    Evidence review, synthesis and supporting evidence  teams: Thanks are extended for the large efforts of the  evidence review and synthesis teams: Hideaki Arima, Yumi  Asai, Yui Hidaka, Mako Iida, Kotaro Imamura, Mai Iwanaga,  Yuka Kobayashi, Yu Komase, Natsu Sasaki (The University  of Tokyo, Japan), Reiko Inoue, Akizumi Tsutsumi (Kitasato  University School of Medicine, Japan), Hisashi Eguchi,  Ayako Hino, Akiomi Inoue (University of Occupational and  Environmental Health, Japan), Yasumasa Otsuka (University  of Tsukuba, Japan), Asuka Sakuraya (Tokyo Women’s Medical  University, Japan), Akihito Shimazu (Keio University, Japan),  Kanami Tsuno (Kanagawa University of Human Services,  Japan); Taylor Braund, Richard Bryant, Jasmine ChoiChristou, Mark Deady, Nadine Garland, Aimee Gayed, Sam  Haffar, Sophia Mobbs, Katherine Petrie, Jessica Strudwick  (University of New South Wales, Australia); Arpana Amarnath,  Pim Cuijpers, Eirini Karyotaki, Clara Miguel (Vrije University,  WHO Collaborating Centre for Research and Dissemination  of Psychological Interventions, Netherlands); Liam O’Mara,  Kathleen Pike, Adam Rosenfeld, Hikari Shumsky (Columbia  University, WHO Collaborating Centre for Capacity Building  and Training in Global Mental Health, USA). Members of the  supporting evidence teams were: Rachel Lewis, Fehmidah  Munir, Alice Sinclair, Jo Yarker (Affinity Health at Work, United  Kingdom); Promit Ananyo Chakraborty, Vanessa Evans,  Raymond Lam, Jill Murphy (University of British Columbia,  Canada) and Andrew Greenshaw, Jasmin Noble (University of  Alberta, Canada). Thanks are also extended to Christy Braham  (Women in Informal Employment: Globalizing and Organizing,  [WIEGO]) for support during the development of supporting  evidence for the informal economy.  Financial support: WHO gratefully acknowledges the  financial support provided by the Wellcome Trust for the  development of the guidelines. 

viii CBT CerQual cRCT CRE ERG EtD GDG GRADE GRC ICD ILO LMIC mhGAP MHPSS PICO RCT RTO SME UN UNCRPD WHO WHO SG cognitive behavioural therapy confidence in the Evidence from Reviews of Qualitative research cluster-randomized controlled trial WHO office of compliance, risk management and ethics external review group evidence-to-decision (framework) guideline development group grading of recommendations, assessment, development and evaluation WHO guideline review committee international classification of diseases International Labour Organization low- and middle-income country WHO mental health gap action programme mental health and psychosocial support population intervention comparator outcome randomized controlled trial responsible technical officer Small and medium enterprise United Nations United Nations convention on the rights of persons with disabilities World Health Organization World Health Organization steering group Abbreviations

             ix Executive summary

x Guidelines on mental health at work For a large proportion of the global population, mental health  and work are integrally intertwined. Mental health is more  than the absence of mental health conditions. Rather, mental  health is a state of mental well-being that enables people  to cope with the stresses of life, to realize their abilities,  to learn well and work well, and to contribute to their  communities. Mental health conditions occur irrespective  of whether work has causally contributed to them. Poor  mental health has a negative effect on a person’s cognitive,  behavioural, emotional, social and relational well-being and  functioning, their physical health, and their personal identity  and well-being as related to work. A person’s capacity to  participate in work can be consequently impaired through  a reduction in productivity and performance, reduction in  the ability to work safely, or difficulty in retaining or gaining  work. Presenteeism (or lost productivity, which is where the  largest financial costs lie), absenteeism and staff turnover  affect both workers and employers and, in turn, the society’s  economy. An estimated 15% of working-age adults have a  mental disorder at any point in time. The size of the public  health problem of mental health conditions is greater than  the volume of investment to address it. This is the case  despite international conventions calling for the protection of  workers’ physical and mental health through national policies  in occupational safety and health.  In these guidelines, the World Health Organization (WHO)  provides evidence-based global public health guidance on  organizational interventions, manager and worker training,  and individual interventions for the promotion of positive  mental health and prevention of mental health conditions,  as well as recommendations on returning to work following  absence associated with mental health conditions and  gaining employment for people living with mental health  conditions. The guidelines indicate whether and what  interventions can be delivered to whole workforces – e.g.  within a workplace (universal), to workers at-risk of mental  health conditions (selective), or to workers experiencing  emotional distress (indicated) – or to workers experiencing  mental health conditions. Through the provision of these  new WHO recommendations, it is anticipated that the  guidelines will facilitate national and workplace-level actions  in the areas of policy development, service planning and  delivery in the domains of mental and occupational health.  The guidelines seek to improve the implementation of  evidence-based interventions for mental health at work. The guidelines were developed in accordance with the  WHO handbook for guideline development and meet  international standards for evidence-based guidelines. In  collaboration with the Guideline Development Group (GDG),  the WHO Steering Group developed key questions and rated  outcomes in order to identify those which were critical  for the development of the guideline. Conflicts of interest  from all individual guideline contributors were declared,  assessed and managed in line with WHO’s Compliance, Risk  Management and Ethics (CRE) policy. Systematic evidence reviews were used to develop the  summary of findings tables, according to the Grading  of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and  Evaluations (GRADE) approach. The GDG developed  recommendations that considered a range of elements,  namely: the certainty of the evidence; the balance between  desirable and undesirable effects; values and preferences of  beneficiaries; resource requirements and cost-effectiveness;  health equity, equality and discrimination; feasibility; human  rights; and sociocultural acceptability. 

5 Manager training for health,  humanitarian and emergency workers Training managers to support the mental health of health,  humanitarian and emergency workers should be delivered  to improve managers’ knowledge, attitudes and behaviours  for mental health.  Strong recommendation, moderate-certainty of evidence 4 Manager training for mental health Training managers to support their workers’ mental health  should be delivered to improve managers’ knowledge,  attitudes and behaviours for mental health and to improve  workers’ help-seeking behaviours. Strong recommendation, moderate-certainty of evidence   3 Organizational  interventions for  workers with mental  health conditions  Reasonable work accommodations  should be implemented for workers  with mental health conditions, including  psychosocial disabilities, in line with  international human rights principles. Strong recommendation, very low-certainty  evidence   2 Organizational  interventions for  health, humanitarian and emergency  workers Organizational interventions that  address psychosocial risk factors, for  example reductions to workload and  schedule changes or improvement  in communication and teamwork,  may be considered for health,  humanitarian and emergency workers  to reduce emotional distress and  improve work-related outcomes. Conditional recommendation, very lowcertainty of evidence Recommendations for training managers   1 Recommendations for organizational interventions Universal  organizational  interventions Organizational interventions that  address psychosocial risk factors,  including interventions involving  participatory approaches, may be  considered for workers to reduce  emotional distress and improve workrelated outcomes. Conditional recommendation, very lowcertainty of evidence 7 Training for health, humanitarian and  emergency workers in mental health  literacy and awareness Training health, humanitarian and emergency workers in  mental health literacy and awareness may be delivered to  improve trainees’ mental health-related knowledge and  attitudes at work, including stigmatizing attitudes.  Conditional recommendation, very low-certainty of evidence 6 Training for workers in mental health  literacy and awareness Training workers in mental health literacy and awareness may be  delivered to improve trainees’ mental health-related knowledge  and attitudes at work, including stigmatizing attitudes. Conditional recommendation, very low-certainty of evidence Recommendations for training workers              xi Executive Summary

  10 Individual  interventions  for workers with  emotional distress   9 Individual  interventions for  health, humanitarian  and emergency  workers 8 Universal individual  interventions 9A Universally delivered psychosocial  interventions that aim to build workers’  skills in stress management – such as  interventions based on mindfulness  or cognitive behavioural approaches  – may be considered for health,  humanitarian and emergency workers  in order to promote positive mental  health and reduce emotional distress. Conditional recommendation,  low-certainty of evidence 9B Psychosocial interventions – such  as stress management and self-care  training, or communication skills  training – may be made available for  health, humanitarian and emergency  workers who are experiencing  emotional distress.  Conditional recommendation, low-certainty  of evidence 8A  Universally delivered psychosocial  interventions that aim to build  workers’ skills in stress management  – such as interventions based on  mindfulness or cognitive behavioural  approaches – may be considered for  workers to promote positive mental  health, reduce emotional distress and  improve work effectiveness. Conditional recommendation,  low-certainty of evidence 8B Opportunities for leisure-based  physical activity – such as resistance  training, strength-training, aerobic  training, walking or yoga – may be  considered for workers to improve  mental health and work ability.   Conditional recommendation, very lowcertainty of evidence 10A For workers with emotional distress,  psychosocial interventions such as  those based on mindfulness or cognitive  behavioural approaches, or problemsolving training, may be considered in  order to reduce these symptoms and  improve work effectiveness. Conditional recommendation, very lowcertainty of evidence 10B For workers with emotional distress,  physical exercise, such as aerobic training  and weight-training, may be considered  in order to reduce these symptoms.  Conditional recommendation, very lowcertainty evidence Recommendations for individual interventions For people on absence associated with mental health conditions, (a) work-directed care plus evidence-based mental health clinical  care or (b) evidence-based mental health clinical care alone should be considered for the reduction of mental health symptoms and  reduction in days of absence.  Conditional recommendation, low-certainty of evidence Recommendations for returning to work after absence associated  with mental health conditions   11 Returning to work after absence associated with mental health conditions xii Guidelines on mental health at work

Recommendations for gaining employment for people living  with mental health conditions Recovery-oriented strategies enhancing vocational and economic inclusion – such as (augmented) supported employment – should be  made available for people with severe mental health conditions, including psychosocial disabilities, to obtain and maintain employment. Strong recommendation, low-certainty of evidence   12 Gaining employment for people living with mental health conditions Key question 13: Screening programmes As it is unclear whether the potential benefits of screening programmes outweigh potential harms, the GDG did not make a  recommendation for or against screening programmes during employment. Screening programmes              xiii Executive Summary

xiv Guidelines on mental health at work

             1 Introduction Introduction © WHO / Lindsay Mackenzie

2 Guidelines on mental health at work Background For a large proportion of the global population, mental  health and work are integrally intertwined. Mental health  is more than the absence of mental health conditions.  Rather, mental health is a state of mental well-being that  enables people to cope with the stresses of life, to realize  their abilities, to learn well and work well, and to contribute  to their communities. Mental health conditions occur  irrespective of whether work has causally contributed  to them. Poor mental health has a negative effect on a  person’s cognitive, behavioural, emotional, social and  relational well-being and functioning, their physical health,  and their personal identity and well-being as related to  work. A person’s capacity to participate in work can be  consequently impaired through a reduction in productivity  and performance, reduction in the ability to work safely,  or difficulty in retaining or gaining work. Presenteeism (or  lost productivity, which is where the largest financial costs  lie), absenteeism and staff turnover affect both workers and  employers and, in turn, the society’s economy.    An estimated 15% of working-age adults have a mental  disorder at any point in time1. Globally, as of 2019, 301  million people were living with anxiety,1 280 million people  were living with depression, 1 64 million people were  living with schizophrenia or bipolar disorder,1 and [PHONE_REDACTED]people died by suicide each year (1). Many of these  individuals were of working-age. The most prevalent mental  health conditions (i.e. common mental disorders such as  depression and anxiety), are estimated to cost the global  economy US$ 1 trillion each year, with the cost driven  predominantly by lost productivity (2). People living with  severe mental health conditions – including psychosocial  disabilities2 (such as schizophrenia and bipolar disorder) –  are, for reasons such as stigma and discrimination, largely  excluded from work despite the fact that participation in  economic activities is important for recovery.  Work is a social determinant of mental health. Meaningful  work is protective for mental health; it contributes to a  person’s sense of accomplishment, confidence and their  earnings, and contributes to recovery and inclusion for people  living with psychosocial disabilities. However, harmful or poor  working conditions, hazardous work environments and work  organization, poor working relationships or unemployment –  and the prolonged exposure to these, rather than to positive  working conditions – can significantly contribute to worsening  mental health or exacerbate existing mental health conditions.  There is reasonable consensus on the influence of certain risk  factors, also called psychosocial risks (3), on mental health at  work. Box 1 lists some of these risk factors, but there are many  additional risks which may be specific to certain countries  or occupations, and emerging risks are seen as the culture  of work changes over time or as the result of major societal  events (such a global pandemic or conflict).  Society-level events influence mental health and work.  Economic recessions or emergencies elicit risks such as  job loss, financial instability, organizational restructuring,  reduced employment opportunities, increased  unemployment, and increased work without full-time or  formal contracts (4). Work can be a microcosm for amplifying  wider issues which negatively affect mental health, including  discrimination and inequality based on sociodemographic  factors and their intersectionality, such as age, caste, class,  disability, gender identity, migrant status, race/ethnicity,  religious beliefs and sexual orientation. While addressing  bullying in school-aged persons draws attention, the same  cannot be said for the volume of abusive conduct (whether  by third parties or between colleagues) experienced by adults  at work (5, 6). Most critically, the stigma surrounding mental  health conditions remains a dominant barrier to disclosure at  work (7), to the implementation of support at work for people  living with mental health conditions or, indeed, to the uptake  of available support for workers.  1 Global Burden of Disease (GBD) Results Tool. In: Global Health Data Exchange [website]. Seattle: Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation; 2019 (http://ghdx.healthdata.org,  accessed 1 November 2021). Note: these are IHME GBD 2019 data and do not necessarily represent ICD-11 categorization. 2 WHO recognizes that many people with lived experience of mental health conditions prefer the term ‘psychosocial disabilities.’ For consistent reading, “mental health  conditions” will primarily be used, as will “mental health conditions including psychosocial disabilities” when required. Psychosocial disabilities are included within the  umbrella definition of “mental health conditions”.

Box 1. Psychosocial risks to mental health at work Ten categories of risk factors for poor mental health (as well as poor physical health) related to the workplace have  broadly been identified (adapted from: 14, 15).  ▶ Work content/task design: e.g. lack of variety or short work cycles, fragmented or meaningless work, under-use of skills, high uncertainty,  continuous exposure to people through work;   ▶ Workload and work pace:  e.g. work overload or under-load, machine pacing, high levels of time pressure, continual subjection to deadlines;  ▶ Work schedule:  e.g. shift-working, night shifts, inflexible work schedules, unpredictable hours, long or unsociable hours;   ▶ Control:  e.g. low participation in decision-making, lack of control over workload, pacing, etc.;   ▶ Environment and equipment:  e.g. inadequate equipment availability, suitability or maintenance; poor environmental conditions such as lack of  space, poor lighting, excessive noise;   ▶ Organizational culture and function:  e.g. poor communication, low levels of support for problem-solving and personal development, lack of definition  of, or agreement on, organizational objectives, organizational change; high competition for scarce resources,  over-complex bureaucracies; ▶ Interpersonal relationships at work:  e.g. social or physical isolation, poor relationships with superiors, interpersonal conflict, harmful work  behaviours, lack of (perceived, actual) social support; bullying, harassment, mobbing; microaggressions;  ▶ Role in organization:  e.g. role ambiguity, role conflict, and responsibility for other people;   ▶ Career development:  e.g. career stagnation and uncertainty, under-promotion or over-promotion, poor pay, job insecurity, low social  value of work;   ▶ Home-work interface:  e.g. conflicting demands of work and home, including for persons with caregiving responsibilities, low support at home,  dual career problems; living at the same site where the work is done, living away from family during work assignments.              3 Introduction An estimated two billion workers (over 60% of the global  worker population) are in the informal economy (8).  Compared to the formal sector, informal workers, who are  often women or members of marginalized groups, are not  offered social protections that provide access to health  care and coupled with low incomes and poor working  conditions, risk the likelihood of poor mental health  (9–11). In turn, workers who may face greater exposure  to psychosocial risks, and who may, but not always, be  within the informal economy include agricultural workers,  street vendors, domestic workers, casual labourers and  may include some family businesses, or the gig economy3.  Changes in the way people work, while benefiting  economic development, can also exacerbate work-related  stress as workers are increasingly working longer hours.  Globally, one third of the workforce is estimated to  work more than 48 hours per week, especially in lowerresourced contexts (12). Evolving knowledge on the  impacts of changes to flexible working and teleworking,  while proving invaluable for some sectors in the context  of the COVID-19 pandemic, shows a mixed array of  advantages and disadvantages (13). 3 A gig economy is a free market system in which temporary positions are common and organizations hire independent workers for short-term commitments.

The size of the public health problem of mental health  conditions is greater than the volume of investment to  address it. This is the case despite international conventions  calling for the protection of workers’ physical and mental  health through national policies in occupational safety and  health (16). Programmes for work-related mental health  promotion and prevention of mental health conditions  are among the least frequently reported promotion and  preventions programmes, by countries (35%) (17).  The promotion of mental well-being and the prevention of  mental health conditions have been recognized as means to  achieving the global priority for the reduction of premature  mortality from noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) by  one third (United Nations Sustainable Development Goal,  target 3.4). The WHO Comprehensive Mental Health Action  Plan, 2013–[PHONE_REDACTED]sets a global objective for promotion  and prevention and for the provision of comprehensive,  integrated and responsive services in community-based  settings (including workplaces). The WHO global strategy  on health, environment and climate change  (19) identifies  workplaces as essential settings for the prevention of a  range of modifiable risks, particularly for NCDs. Mental  disorders are recognized in the ILO list of occupational  diseases which was revised in 2010, under ‘mental and  behavioural disorders’.4 Some countries have extended  their list to cover work-related stress, burnout, depression  and sleep disorders. Some countries also recognize workrelated suicide and include it in their systems of reporting,  notification and compensation. Well-being is a billion-dollar industry, where interventions  related to mental health may go unregulated for their  quality or evidence base. Although several countries and  professional societies have guidelines on the topic of  work and mental health, these are specific to the country  population. International standards on workplace mental  health have been developed, with a specialist focus on the  management of psychosocial risks (20).  Persons of working age spend a significant proportion  of their time working. An estimated 62% of the global  population aged 15 years and above are economically  active (21). Work presents an opportunity to promote good  mental health and to prevent and support people living with  mental health conditions (22). To date, global evidencebased guidelines for the promotion, prevention and support  of mental health related to work are lacking; the above  rationale highlights the need for guidelines now.  4 Guidelines on mental health at work 4 ILO Recommendation No. 194 concerning the List of Occupational Diseases and the Recording and Notification of Occupational Accident and Diseases specifically covers  mental health and behavioural disorders, including “(2.4.1) Post-traumatic stress disorders” and “(2.4.2) Other mental and behavioural disorders not mentioned in the preceding  item where a direct link is established scientifically, or determined by methods appropriate to national conditions and practice, between the exposure to risk factors arising from  work activities and the mental and behavioural disorder(s) contracted by the worker.” 

             5 Introduction Guideline objectives These guidelines provide recommendations on  interventions – defined in further detail below – in the  following areas: organizational interventions, manager  and worker training and individual interventions for the  promotion of positive mental health and prevention of  mental health conditions. It also includes recommendations  on returning to work following absence associated with  mental health conditions and gaining employment for  people living with mental health conditions. The guidelines  indicate whether and what interventions can be delivered to  whole workforces (universal) – e.g. within a workplace – to  workers at risk of mental health conditions (selective), for  workers experiencing emotional distress (indicated), or for  workers already experiencing mental health conditions.    Through the provision of these recommendations, it is  anticipated that these guidelines will facilitate national  and workplace-level actions in the areas of policy  development, service planning and delivery in the domains  of mental health and occupational health. The guidelines  seek to improve the implementation of evidence-based  interventions for mental health at work.   Scope of the guidelines The guidelines focus on civilian adults, aged 18 years5 and  above, who are engaged in paid formal or informal work.  The guidelines do not address interventions for military  personnel or persons exposed to forced labour, trafficking  and modern slavery, or child labour. The populations  considered in this guideline include all workers with or  without known mental health conditions, or persons with  mental health conditions or psychosocial disability seeking  to gain work or return to work. Workers in at-risk occupations are included, that is,  occupations with an increased likelihood of exposure to  adverse events (e.g. potentially traumatic events or a series  of events which are extremely threatening or horrific) that  increase the likelihood of mental health conditions.  These  include emergency workers (such as national police or fire  services), humanitarian workers (international or national),  and health workers ([PHONE_REDACTED]. While many occupations  face adversities that place them at elevated risk for poor  mental health (e.g. due to harmful working conditions),  these specific occupations were selected because of  frequent requests to WHO for guidelines for these groups.  The recommendations for these selective groups of at-risk  workers may, however, be applicable to other occupations  that are likely to experience disproportionate risks to mental  health at work.  5 According to the Minimum Age Convention, 1973 (No. 138), the general minimum age for work is set at 15 years of age (13 years for light work) and for hazardous work is 18  years (16 years under strict conditions), with the possibility of initially setting the general minimum age at 14 years (12 years for light work) where the economy and educational  facilities are insufficiently developed. The age of 18 years was set as the minimum for this guideline, as younger workers are at a different cognitive, emotional, biological and  social developmental stage and may need additional considerations for their mental health in relation to work.   9 Health workers are “all people primarily engaged in actions with the primary intent of enhancing health” – i.e. health, nursing and care occupations in the International standard  classification of occupations 2008 (ILO ICSO-08). Humanitarian workers are international or national workers who deliver humanitarian assistance. Emergency workers  provide public emergency services e.g. police, fire, emergency medical response, search and rescue (See:  Guidelines on decent work in public emergency services. Geneva:  International Labour Organization, 2018 (https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_dialogue/---sector/documents/normativeinstrument/wcms_626551.pdf, accessed  25 May 2022). 

6 Guidelines on mental health at work All interventions in these guidelines are delivered in, or are related to, work. Workers may access some interventions outside  of a work context, but the intervention has been designed to specifically support workers. The interventions within the  scope of the guidelines are as follows:  Organizational interventions  These seek to assess, modify, mitigate or remove work-related psychosocial risks to mental health conditions. They are planned  actions that directly target working conditions with the aim of preventing deterioration in mental health, physical health,  quality of life and work-related outcomes of workers. The interventions can include activities directed at teams. Organizational  interventions are often focused on primary and secondary prevention but may also include tertiary prevention (e.g.  interventions to support the return to work of workers with mental health problems). Organizational interventions focused on  an individual include reasonable accommodations at work (i.e. changes to work to accommodate the person’s needs).  Training managers and workers  Manager training for mental health is delivered to workers who supervise others. It aims to build capacity to protect and support  the mental health of direct supervisees through, for instance, a manager knowing when and how to support a person. Similar  training is also available for workers to support themselves through increased awareness and knowledge of mental health  (worker training).  Individual interventions  These include interventions delivered directly to a worker (completed by the worker, with or without guidance). They  include psychosocial interventions (i.e. interventions that use a psychological, behavioural or social approach, or a  combination of these) and leisure-based physical activities such as exercise (not physical labour as a part of work).  Return-to-work programmes  This is designed to support workers in a meaningful return to work and in reducing the symptoms of mental ill-health  following periods of absence. These can be multi-component interventions combining any mix of individual, manager and  organizational interventions.  Gaining employment programmes  In the context of the present guidelines, these interventions are designed to support the entry into paid work of people  living with mental health conditions. These are also multi-component interventions. These guidelines also explored screening programmes delivered during employment (reported under key question 13 [Q13]).  The aim of the screening is to identify symptoms of mental health, followed by referral to an appropriate level of care. 

Fig. 1 shows the interventions addressed in these guidelines at different population levels.

             7 Introduction Fig. 1. Interventions covered in the guidelines on mental health at work Target audiences of these guidelines are primarily individuals or entities responsible for the planning, programming  or implementation of measures for the health, safety and well-being of workers. These can include occupational health  & safety and mental health providers as well as service-delivery managers, employers and workers and their unions,  organizations or cooperatives, human resource services, professional bodies, and employee education, well-being or  training services. The guidelines and its derivative products will also have implications for international and national policymakers, planners, programme managers and researchers in mental health, occupational health and labour.  Mental health  promotion Prevention  of mental  health  conditions Supporting  workers with  emotional  distress or  mental health  conditions GAINING EMPLOYMENT:  can be delivered to workers  with (severe) mental health  conditions (Q12) RETURN-TO-WORK:  can be delivered to workers who  are on absence associated with  mental health conditions (Q11) INDICATED: can be delivered to  workers with emotional distress Organizational (Q3); Individual (Q10) SELECTIVE: can be delivered to at-risk  workers (indicated or universal) Organizational (Q2); Manager training (Q5);  Worker training (Q7); Individual (Q9) UNIVERSAL: can be delivered to all the workforce Organizational (Q1); Manager training (Q4);  Worker training (Q6); Individual (Q8)

8 Guidelines on mental health at work The guidelines were developed in accordance with the WHO handbook for guideline development (26) and meet international  standards for evidence-based guidelines. The steps for the development of WHO guidelines include the following, with  further detail provided in the relevant annexes.  Guideline contributors  Identifying who will be the contributors to the guideline process (Annex 1), and how conflicts of interest will be  managed (Annex 2) Scoping the guideline  Deciding what the guideline should be about and what it will not address; the key questions  that should be asked; and what the outcomes of interest are (Annex 3)  Certainty of evidence  Deciding how confident we are about the certainty of that evidence in answering our key questions (Annex 4) Formulating recommendations  Developing the recommendation statements based on the above work (Annex 5) Drafting  Drafting this guideline document, and obtaining more inputs through wide peer review (Annex 6) Quality check  Review for approval to publish by WHO’s quality assurance body (GRC) Publication  Publishing the guideline, and actively supporting its dissemination  Evidence reviews  Searching for the best available evidence to answer the key questions [and supporting evidence] (Annex 4) Method How the guidelines were developed  

             9 Recommendations © WHO / Blink Media - Neil Nuia Recommendations This section includes the recommendations and key remarks, a summary of the main highlights of the evidence,  the rationale for the recommendations and the evidence-to-decision considerations. For full evidence profiles and  supplementary evidence, see the web Annex. To interpret the certainty of the evidence (i.e. the differences between very  low, low, moderate and high certainty of evidence), see Annex 4. To interpret the strength of the recommendation (i.e. the  meaning of conditional and strong recommendations), see Annex 5. 

10 Guidelines on mental health at work Overarching remarks across all recommendations ▶ Each recommendation represents one category  of intervention options. These interventions are  preferably delivered comprehensively – i.e. by  embedding delivery of organizational interventions,  manager training and training for workers, individual  interventions, return-to-work programmes and gaining  employment programmes in existing or newlydeveloped work health policies, rather than delivering  interventions independently of each other without  comprehensive integration.  ▶ The recommendations for these guidelines rely on  preconditions and principles which would facilitate  the uptake, implementation, benefit, and reduction of  harm towards addressing the mental health of people  who work. These include, but are not limited to:  	» the protection of people with mental health  conditions from discrimination and otherwise  unfair treatment in the world of work and the  promotion of their rights to access decent work  on an equal basis with others and to be supported  when there is a need to return to work or a desire  to participate in work (United Nations Convention  on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities  [UNCRPD]; ILO Conventions 111, 159 and 190 and  their recommendations; WHO Comprehensive  Mental Health Action Plan [PHONE_REDACTED];  	» the protection of mental health at work (ILO  Conventions 155, 161, 187 and 190 and their  recommendations; WHO Comprehensive Mental  Health Action Plan [PHONE_REDACTED]; 	» the fundamental right of everyone to work within  decent working conditions, to be protected  from unemployment, to be fairly and equally  compensated (Universal Declaration of Human  Rights, Article 23); including support to the  informal sector to transition to the formal  economy (ILO Recommendation 204);  	» access to safe, supportive and decent working  conditions for all people who work (including  informal workers), with attention to organizational  improvements in the workplace; implementation  of evidence-based programmes to promote  mental well-being and prevent mental health  conditions (WHO Comprehensive Mental Health  Action Plan [PHONE_REDACTED]; 	» the cross-cutting principles of the WHO  Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan  [PHONE_REDACTED], namely: universal health coverage  (all persons should be able to access, without  the risk of impoverishing themselves, essential  health and social services); human rights (mental  health strategies, actions and interventions  must be compliant with the UNCRPD and  other international and regional human rights  instruments); evidence-based practice (mental  health strategies, actions and interventions  need to be based on scientific evidence and/ or best practice, taking cultural considerations  into account); a life-course approach (policies,  plans and services for mental health need to  take account all stages of the life course); a  multisectoral approach (a coordinated response  which partners health with relevant sectors  such as employment and labour); and the  empowerment of persons with mental disorders  and psychosocial disabilities (people with lived  experience should be involved and should  participate in all aspects of mental health policy,  planning and implementation). 

Recommendations  for organizational  interventions

1 RECOMMENDATION 12 Guidelines on mental health at work Universal organizational interventions Organizational interventions that address psychosocial risk factors,  including interventions involving participatory approaches, may be  considered for workers to reduce emotional distress and improve  work-related outcomes. Conditional recommendation, very low-certainty of evidence Key remarks: ▶ Universal organizational interventions are organizational interventions which can be delivered or  applied universally, that is, to a whole of a given workforce or work-setting.  Common implementation remarks across all organizational intervention recommendations:  ▶ An assessment of the work-related or psychosocial risk factors affecting workers’ (mental and  physical) health should be undertaken in planning organizational interventions and should be  integrated in continual and regular overall occupational health risk assessment and monitoring  protocols at work – including whenever there are changes in the work or in the organization of  work which may have a negative impact on health.  ▶ Fidelity to implementation processes for organizational intervention – i.e. the extent to which  an intervention was delivered as conceived and planned – is undervalued and understated, yet  adherence to fidelity would likely benefit (health) outcomes. Subgroup remarks: ▶ Culturally and contextually sensitive planning and delivery of interventions is required. Some  sociodemographic groups may be adversely and differentially affected by psychosocial risk  factors more than others are; assessment and planning which takes account of the diversity of  a workforce would identify such differences. Changes applied universally to psychosocial risk  factors may benefit work settings with workers from diverse sociodemographic backgrounds.  However, persons responsible for implementing organizational interventions should monitor  the impact of the changes on workers to identify whether there are disproportionate impacts  on some workers (such as, whether some workers who have flexible working arrangements  experience negative job consequences such as lack of networking opportunities).  Monitoring and evaluation remarks: ▶ Include work-related outcomes and mental health outcomes as part of continual monitoring  of the impact of organizational interventions (where monitoring is designed so that no single  individual’s health outcomes can be identified).  Additional remarks: ▶ No direct evidence was obtained on preventing suicidal behaviours. Some occupations or work  environments may have ready access to lethal means of suicide. Restriction of access to the means  of suicide is one of the key suicide prevention measures (Mental Health Gap Action Programme  (mhGAP) guideline for mental, neurological and substance use disorders, 2015. Geneva: World  Health Organization; 2015). This can include not only regulations at national level but also the  implementation of organizational policies at the work level – e.g. banning highly hazardous  pesticides, restricting or regulating firearms, and restricting access to high-toxicity medicines. 

             13 Recommendations for organizational interventions Evidence and rationale Key question 1 investigated whether universally delivered  organizational interventions (e.g. interventions or  approaches targeting the mitigation, reduction or removal  of psychosocial risk factors at work) have a beneficial impact  on worker outcomes (Annex 3). Evidence was extracted  from five systematic reviews comparing usual practice  (care as usual/other intervention/no intervention) to:  flexible working arrangements (flexitime) (27), flexible  working arrangements (teleworking)[PHONE_REDACTED]; participatory  organizational interventions targeting job design[PHONE_REDACTED];  changes to workload or breaks9 (29); nudging strategies10   targeting the physical work environment (30); providing  performance feedback/reward (31) (web Annex). All  extracted evidence was of very low certainty, except where  otherwise indicated.  For flexible working arrangements (flexitime) there  were small effects in favour of flexitime on mental health  symptoms (e.g. psychological health) and correspondingly  low-certainty evidence for the small positive effects on  the work-related outcome of job satisfaction. Additional  evidence11  supports the view that offering control in flexible  working arrangements (such as self-scheduling) may have  favourable impacts on health (32). For flexible working  arrangements (teleworking) there were small positive  effects in favour of teleworking on mental health symptoms.  Teleworking was inversely related to absenteeism in one  study reported in Kröll (27) using a cross-sectional study  design in Europe. For participatory organizational interventions targeting  job design, narrative findings from individual trials were  available. One cluster-randomized controlled trial (cRCT)  reported that work unit-level12  interventions with worker  participation and dialogue, job redesign, and organizational  learning found a significant decrease in mental health  symptoms (depersonalization and somatic symptoms)  but no significant findings on other critical or important  outcomes (Annex 3). It should be noted that participatory  approaches are a method of delivery, and the interventions  themselves either target different risk factors or are of  differing designs (28, 29, 33).  For changes to workload or breaks, (e.g. through task  rotation such as changing job tasks from high to low  workloads) one study which included proxy workers for  the informal sector (e.g. refuse collection sector) reported  low certainty of evidence for no effect of a job rotation  intervention on mental health symptoms (i.e. the need for  recovery) at 3- , 6- and 12-month follow-up.  For nudging  strategies targeting the physical work environment  there were small effects in favour of the physical  environment (walking strategies) for work performance. For  performance feedback/reward, one study reported that  a multicomponent intervention containing performance  bonus, job promotion opportunities and mentoring support  had higher retention rates compared to a matched wait list  control group (i.e. given the intervention after 12 months) at  12- and 36-month follow-up.   7 Flexible working arrangements facilitate workers’ control over when (flexitime) and/or where (teleworking) they work.  8 Participatory approaches involve including workers alongside employers and other key stakeholders in the planning, design, implementation and evaluation of organizational  interventions. Job design refers to the content, tasks, activities or duties of a worker. 9 Changes to workloads or breaks include examples such as setting limits on working hours, introducing planned breaks, including weekend breaks, or fewer days on shift/ rotations within a week. 10 Nudging strategies include prompting a person to engage in an activity such as verbal or technology-based reminders.  11 Additional evidence is evidence identified by the review teams within web Annex evidence profiles, which were not subject to GRADE. These were high quality reviews which  met inclusion criteria for the key questions, however were not selected for GRADE, in the circumstance that other reviews may have better or more comprehensively addressed  the critical and important outcomes for the key questions. 12 Unit-level: such as within a team, department or organization. 

14 Guidelines on mental health at work Overall, no outcomes were reported for positive mental  health, quality of life and functioning, suicidal behaviours,  substance use and adverse effects. No direct evidence  was available on the harms of implementing universally  delivered organizational interventions, which may be due to  publication bias or may reflect minimal harms (28). Critically, the GDG took into account the wider body of  evidence which indicates that psychosocial risks at work  are negatively associated with mental health and related  outcomes. For example, for job content/task design, job/ task rotation demonstrated positive effects on mental  health symptoms (stress/burnout) (34). For workload and  work pace, high workload increases the risk of symptoms  of mental health conditions (35, 36). For work schedule,  the evidence for an association between overtime/long  working hours and depression which meets diagnostic  status is not conclusive (37). However, long working hours  are associated with symptoms of depression (38) and an  increased likelihood for the onset of new risky alcohol use  in people working 49–54 hours per week, and over 55 hours  a week (39). Shift work has been associated with binge  drinking disorders (40), and the odds of suicidal behaviours  (ideation) increase with long working hours/shift work  (41). Factors associated with job control (i.e. low authority  in decision-making in own’s work) are associated with  symptoms of mental health conditions (36); whereas higher  decision latitude is protective for depressive symptoms  (42) and higher job control is associated with reduced  emotional exhaustion burnout (35). Low job control has  been associated with increased odds of suicide (41) and with  increased odds of absence related to mental health diagnosis  (43). Job strain (combining low decision latitude and high  demands) is associated with depressive symptoms (42) and  diagnostic-status depression (44). For organizational culture  and function, low organizational justice13 is associated with  subthreshold mental health symptoms (35, 36, 42). As for  interpersonal relationships at work, workplace bullying  (which was defined by the review as a person perceiving they  are experiencing bullying) is associated with symptoms of  depression, anxiety and stress (45); workplace violence is  associated with depressive disorder (46); and low co-worker  support and low supervisor support increase the risk of  subthreshold symptoms (36), suicidal behaviours (ideation),  and suicide mortality (41). With regard to a person’s role  in an organization, role ambiguity and role conflict are  associated with depression outcomes (47) and, as for career  development, job insecurity is related to higher risk of  depressive symptoms (42, 48) and risk of suicidal behaviours  (ideation) (41). With regard to the home–work interface  (e.g. prioritization of time between work and private life),  increased work–family conflict was associated with greater  use of psychotropic medications (49). Additionally, the  effort–reward imbalance (combining high efforts at work  and low rewards in terms of wages, promotion prospects,  job security, appreciation and respect) is associated with  increased risk of depressive disorders (50).  13  i.e. perceived fairness at work. 

             15 Recommendations for organizational interventions Evidence-to-decision considerations People who work value the changes to their working  conditions through the means of organizational  interventions which address psychosocial risks for benefits  on their health and well-being (web Annex: Values and  preferences survey). A particularly high value is placed on  participatory approaches such that workers, leadership  and other key stakeholders make decisions together for the  betterment of their health.  There is variability in the resources required to implement  organizational interventions. Participatory organizational  interventions were identified as ranging from 6 to 12 months  (33). Variation in the composition and costs of the delivery  agents, or whether equipment is required, will have an  impact on human resource costs. Resources (such as financial  expenses) may be incurred by workers themselves, such  as during teleworking. No reviews directly examined costeffectiveness. Yet, during the implementation of a participatory  organizational intervention in Japan, the cost of implementation  was estimated to be ¥ 7660 per employee (approximately US$  70) and the benefit was equivalent to approximately US$ [PHONE_REDACTED]per employee in the following 12 months (51).  For health equity, equality and discrimination, no  moderating differences were identified on the basis of  sociodemographic characteristics (such as gender and race)  regarding the impact of organizational interventions on the  outcomes (27). There are geographical, occupational, class  and gender differences in the likelihood of experiencing  risk factors related to poor working conditions (52).  Organizational interventions for the prevention of these risk  factors and improvement of working conditions are likely  to reduce health inequalities for all workers, and for those  most likely to experience disproportionate psychosocial  risks at work in formal and informal sectors (web Annex).  Regarding feasibility, evidence was obtained from  studies conducted in high-income countries in AsiaPacific, Europe and North America. Good practices of  organizational interventions have been reported in low- and  middle-income countries (LMICs), including those using  participatory approaches (53). Small and medium-sized  enterprises (SMEs) or the informal sector may benefit  from guidance from primary health-care services or the  vocational sector, who may be able to provide advice on  addressing risk factors at work, where there is capacity to  do so (54). Nevertheless, interventions such as teleworking,  when conducted with limited organizational support or  resources, may conversely produce negative effects (13). The  necessity to continue to understand emerging risks (as work  organization and conditions evolve) and their impact on  mental health is underscored by this point. The interventions are in accordance with universal human  rights principles (e.g. Article 23 of the United Nations Universal  Declaration of Human Rights (55)). Interventions would need to  be socioculturally adapted for the level of the work setting or  the sector itself and for the intended recipients. Organizational  interventions via the primary prevention of psychosocial risks  to protect workers’ mental health are included in international  labour standards (56). The necessity to develop good working  conditions is included in the WHO global strategy on health,  environment, and climate change (57).

16 Guidelines on mental health at work The GDG concluded that, despite very low certainty of the  available evidence, the likely benefits of organizational  interventions on reducing emotional distress and improving  work-related outcomes outweighed the possible harms  of implementing these interventions. This was supported  by evidence for risk factors at work which negatively affect  mental health outcomes, indicating that interventions to  reduce, remove or mitigate risk factors could improve these  outcomes. The GDG considered several research remarks on  the body of work on organizational interventions, noting that  there is a need to strengthen the growing evidence base in  this area and particularly to strengthen the methodological  rigour of the research, given the complexity of their  implementation as compared to individual interventions. 

2 RECOMMENDATION              17 Recommendations for organizational interventions Key remarks: ▶ Organizational interventions for health, humanitarian and emergency workers are selective as  they target a specific at-risk group (health, humanitarian or emergency workers).  ▶ Health, humanitarian and emergency work is subject to risks that can disproportionately affect  the prevalence of mental health conditions in these occupations. Risks include exposure to  potentially traumatic events (such as violence and harassment), long working hours and high  work and emotional demands. Various subgroups may be further disproportionately affected  by risk factors at work (e.g. health workers in direct support roles, national humanitarian staff,  women, members of marginalized groups, younger workers). However, further expansion on  what the considerations would be for these subgroups in relation to organizational approaches is  urgently needed. ▶ The majority of direct evidence was obtained in health worker populations. Implementation remarks: ▶ All common implementation remarks as indicated under Recommendation 1 apply. As  with Recommendation 1, these can be organizational interventions which may include  participatory processes. Organizational interventions for health,  humanitarian and emergency workers Organizational interventions that address psychosocial risk factors, for  example reductions to workload and schedule changes or improvement in  communication and teamwork, may be considered for health, humanitarian  and emergency workers to reduce emotional distress and improve workrelated outcomes. Conditional recommendation, very low-certainty of evidence

18 Guidelines on mental health at work Evidence and rationale Key question 2 investigated whether organizational  interventions delivered to at-risk workers have a beneficial  impact on outcomes (Annex 3). Evidence was extracted  from five systematic reviews comparing care as usual/ other intervention/no intervention to communication and  teamwork interventions (58-60), workload and schedule  interventions (61), and participatory organizational  interventions (focused on work break schedules,  workload changes and task variation) (29) (web Annex). All  extracted evidence was of very low certainty except where  otherwise indicated. For communication and teamwork, three controlled trials  reported mixed effects on emotional distress, with two  indicating small positive effects (e.g. reduction) on burnout.  One trial observed a beneficial impact on job satisfaction,  while another found a reduction in absenteeism in health  workers who had received a 6-month communication and  teamwork intervention based on improving workplace  civility (a structured intervention designed to address  within-team problems where violence, including bullying,  could occur). Four randomized controlled trials (RCT)  reported mixed findings for job performance, with only one  finding improvement in teamwork behaviours (as a proxy  for performance).  For workload and schedule, low-certainty data from eight  RCTs suggested that there were small positive effects in  favour of workload and schedule changes on burnout. For  participatory organizational interventions (focused on work  break schedules, workload changes and task variation), one  controlled study among health workers reported a reduction  on the need for recovery14 at 12-month follow-up.  Overall, there were no outcomes reported for quality of life  and functioning, suicidal behaviours or substance use. For  communication and teamwork training, one cRCT found no  effect on potential adverse effects of compromised healthcare delivery – i.e. the quality of health care (maternal  or neonatal adverse outcomes) provided by health-care  workers was not negatively affected by the intervention.  No other direct evidence was available on the harms of  implementing these universally delivered organizational  interventions to at-risk groups. 14  Need for recovery is the self-perceived extent to which recovery is required for mental and physical energy to return to sufficient levels to engage in work (29).

             19 Recommendations for organizational interventions Evidence-to-decision considerations Work-related risks in the health, humanitarian and  emergency sectors place this group of workers at risk of  mental health conditions. Organizational interventions  to address such risks are considered a priority (62, 63).  Organizational interventions that address working  conditions are valued among workers in these sectors who  express concern that the delivery of individual interventions  alone is equated with personal blame (for having a mental  health condition or perceived inability to cope) (61). No direct evidence was identified for the resources  required to implement organizational interventions, as  these vary by geographical, national, subnational and  intervention contexts. It is of note that communication and  teamwork interventions were identified as ranging from  4- hours to 6- months in duration so costs depend on the  intensity of the intervention. No reviews examined costeffectiveness directly, which is a critical gap (61).  For health equity, equality and discrimination,  organizational interventions for the prevention of risk  factors and improvement of working conditions are  likely to reduce health inequalities for at-risk workers,  including those most likely to experience disproportionate  psychosocial risks at work – such as young workers,  women, national humanitarian staff and health workers  with direct client-facing roles. However, since one review  (61) pointed to younger workers benefitting less from  multi-modal interventions, including organizational  interventions, greater attention is needed on the subgroup  considerations for organizational intervention in those  most at risk – i.e. tailoring interventions to the needs of  different groups.   With regard to feasibility, only one study was conducted  in the African Region (64), while the majority of studies  were conducted in high-income countries in Europe and  North America. The majority of direct evidence considered  was obtained in health workers. No studies were  conducted in the humanitarian sector, yet national and  international humanitarian staff may prefer organizational  approaches (65). The interventions are in accordance  with universal human rights principles. Sociocultural  adaption is required, and participatory methods may  facilitate such adaptations. The GDG concluded that a conditional recommendation  for organizational interventions was warranted for at-risk  workers. Although the overall certainty of the available  evidence was considered very low, the benefits on  emotional distress and work-related outcomes outweighed  the likely harms. Most promising for mental health were  interventions involving changes to the work schedule; these  were highlighted by the GDG as especially pertinent for  workers in these sectors facing long hours and shift work.  While most of the evidence was obtained in health workers,  this population was considered a proxy for other at-risk  groups such as humanitarian and emergency workers, or for  workers in other at-risk sectors. 

3 RECOMMENDATION 20 Guidelines on mental health at work Key remarks: ▶ The guidelines review process did not identify direct evidence. The indirect evidence (a  systematic review that did not include data suitable for GRADE) involved a narrative summary  of the evidence available for four categories of work accommodation interventions that can be  implemented for workers with mental health conditions, namely: accommodations regarding  communication, flexible scheduling, modification of job description, or modification to the  physical work environment.   ▶ Article 27 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disability (UNCRPD)  states: “Ensure that reasonable accommodation is provided to persons with disabilities in the  workplace”. For this reason, a recommendation was developed.  ▶ Both the terms mental health conditions and psychosocial disabilities were explicitly used in  the recommendation to ensure that beneficiaries are likely to recognize themselves within the  recommendation. ▶ Providing reasonable accommodations promotes an inclusive work environment for workers with  mental health conditions by enhancing equitable access to opportunities and resources at work.   Organizational interventions for workers  with mental health conditions Reasonable work accommodations should be implemented for workers with  mental health conditions, including psychosocial disabilities, in line with  international human rights principles. Strong recommendation, very low-certainty of evidence

             21 Recommendations for organizational interventions Implementation remarks: ▶ In line with UNCRPD Article 27 on Work and Employment, workers with mental health conditions should  not be discriminated against. However, there are concerns that accessing or benefitting from such  support will identify a worker as having a mental health condition or as being perceived as unable to  cope with work, which may subject that worker to discrimination unless measures are taken proactively  within an organization to mitigate mental health stigma and protect the privacy of the person. ▶ Organizational mitigation of stigma for mental health conditions may contribute to reducing  concerns about confidentiality and stigma and can facilitate ease of access to accommodations  by promoting voluntary disclosure. Accommodations can be implemented without identifying  workers to wider colleagues or in accordance with the worker’s preference.  ▶ There is insufficient evidence to identify whether one category of interventions is superior  to another. Workers living with mental health conditions should be accommodated to work  in a person-centred manner, according to their needs, requirements and preferences. Direct  supervisors play a critical role in supporting workers. ▶ Reasonable accommodations may be applied for any worker with a mental health condition(s)  including those returning from absence associated with a mental health condition. However,  they may also be utilized for workers living with mental health conditions, who have not been  on absence, and who remain in work or who newly join work.  ▶ Respect for the human rights of people living with mental health conditions or psychosocial  disabilities is a necessary precondition for this recommendation; otherwise, the implementation  of reasonable accommodations may risk lacking a rehabilitative approach.  ▶ Lower-resourced settings in LMICs, and globally SMEs, can be supported by the public  (health) sectors where there is capacity, to receive guidance on implementing reasonable  accommodations. Workers and employers need access to coordinated multidisciplinary  support, which could be provided feasibly through models of group occupational services (ILO  Convention 161, Article [PHONE_REDACTED]. ▶ Managers or employers should be provided with training and resources to better support  workers who are in receipt of accommodations. ▶ All common implementation remarks, as indicated under Recommendation 1, apply.

22 Guidelines on mental health at work Evidence and rationale Key question 3 investigated whether organizational  interventions delivered to workers with mental health  conditions including psychosocial disabilities were  beneficial. Such interventions are referred to as (reasonable)  workplace or work accommodations (Annex 3). These  are designed to foster sustainable participation in work  activities by providing favourable and adapted working  conditions, matching the needs and requirements of  workers living with disabilities. Only indirect evidence was  available via a systematic review that provided a narrative  summary of the available evidence (67) (web Annex).  Within the review, 15 mixed-method observational studies  were identified. The primary outcomes were mental  health (e.g. change in diagnostic status) and employment  outcomes, such as length of job tenure and income. Four  types of accommodation were identified, as follows:  	 ▶ communication accommodations, such as  regular supportive meetings with supervisors, or  communication according to the preferences on how to  receive information (written or verbal);  	 ▶ scheduling accommodations, such as using frequent  breaks or extra time allowance for completing tasks;  	 ▶ job description accommodations, such as being  gradually reintroduced to tasks, or job or task-sharing;  	 ▶ physical environment accommodations, such  as access to private space for rest, or access to  refrigeration for medication storage.  The available evidence from observational studies  points towards positive associations between work  accommodations, length of employment and improvement of  mental health status (67). The most commonly implemented  accommodations were related to communication and  scheduling. For workers receiving work accommodations,  job tenures were reported to be 7–24 months longer than  the tenures of workers who did not receive accommodations  (67). In one trial, workers who received sufficient work  accommodations, compared to those who did not, were less  likely to have a mental health condition after one year (68). In  one qualitative study, undesirable effects included workers  reporting feeling overprotected, patronised and underchallenged at work (69). 

             23 Recommendations for organizational interventions Evidence-to-decision considerations Workers with mental health conditions and psychosocial  disabilities experience significant barriers to sustaining their  participation in work despite their interest, willingness,  and capacity to participate in work. Work accommodations  seek to ensure that the outcomes that stakeholders value  are improved: sustaining time on the job (i.e. tenure) and  improved mental health. However, stigma and fear of  repercussions remain critical barriers to workers’ confidence  in feeling safe to disclose their mental health status, and  consequently to access accommodations (71).  Resource requirements vary by the type of accommodation  provided. In a dated national survey conducted in the USA,  over half of workplaces reported no initial direct costs or  maintenance costs of the accommodations they applied.  One third reported initial and maintenance costs of less  than US$ 100, with a minority reporting these costs larger  than US$ [PHONE_REDACTED]. No specific study on cost-benefit or costeffectiveness analysis was identified. One study reported  on cost savings of implementing accommodations, resulting  in US$ 11.73 saved per person via financial assistance  programmes in the USA – reportedly a 68% greater saving  than people who did not receive accommodations (73).  For health equity, equality and discrimination, providing  reasonable work accommodations promotes an inclusive  work environment by enhancing equitable access  to opportunities and resources at work and, when  implemented successfully and without prejudice, can  mitigate stigma. Work accommodations are therefore likely  to reduce inequalities between workers with and without  mental health conditions – i.e. by providing optimal  circumstances for workers in need of accommodations to  participate in their work.  Accommodations were not frequently implemented to the  level required by workers with mental health conditions.  In one study, only 30.5% of workers received all required  accommodations, while 16.8% received no accommodations  (74). Potential feasibility concerns include lack of support to  employers to implement legislation for accommodations, what  options/actions are available to support their workers, and  attitudinal concerns that such actions are expensive (67). All  studies in the included review were conducted in high-income  countries, chiefly in the USA. The majority of studies included  people working with severe mental health conditions.  Provision of work accommodations is in line with human  rights conventions (70) and reasonable accommodations  need to be in line with the UNCRPD and national disability,  equality or discrimination law. Consequently, workers  with mental health conditions including psychosocial  disabilities are, in most countries, legally entitled to  reasonable work accommodations. Relevant international  labour standards are: the Vocational Rehabilitation and  Employment (Disabled Persons) Convention, 1983 (No. [PHONE_REDACTED]and the Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment  (Disabled Persons) Recommendation, 1983 (No. 168), where  Recommendation No. 168 refers to providing reasonable  adaptations (76). While sociocultural acceptability is high  for workers who wish to be supported by accommodations,  there remains a barrier for workers who fear disclosure  of their mental health status at work. Workers who are  unable to disclose their status consequently do not  benefit from access to accommodations and, in turn, job  tenure is shortened (71). Efforts to reduce mental health  stigma at work and actively promote relevant equality or  discrimination legislation may help to make persons who  would benefit from disclosure feel supported to do so. 

24 Guidelines on mental health at work The GDG made a strong recommendation in favour of  work accommodations for people living with a mental  health condition(s) and psychosocial disabilities. The  available – albeit limited – evidence suggested that the  balance of potential benefits on job tenure and mental  health status outweighed the harms. Protection from  harms of stigma requires the protection of persons  through the enactment of equality and discrimination  laws. This decision was critically influenced by the  UNCRPD  (70) which calls for the application of reasonable  accommodations for persons with disabilities. Such  instruments, which depend on national and workplace  policies for their enactment, are in place to ensure the  participation of people with disabilities on an equal basis  with others, and to ensure their right to participate in  society, including economic activity. Given that 15% of  the working-age adult population is estimated to have a  mental disorder, the recommendation has the potential to  have an impact on substantial numbers of people. 

Recommendations  for training  managers © WHO / Blink Media - Bart Verweij

4 RECOMMENDATION 26 Guidelines on mental health at work Key remarks: ▶ Manager training for mental health is designed to enable managers to identify and respond  to workers who require support related to mental health, to give managers the confidence to  recognize, engage with and support team members with mental health problems and to adjust  job stressors in working conditions. Such training, however, is not designed for managers to  become mental health-care providers. Managers cannot – and should not – be in a position to  diagnose or treat mental disorders after such training.  Common implementation remarks for manager training for mental health:  ▶ Managers include persons who are in direct supervisory roles, responsible for supervision/ management of one or more workers. Managers can include administrative managers or  managers who are technical specialists in their field. ▶ Attention should be paid to ensure the evidence base (the quality and effectiveness) of the  training before delivering it to managers.  ▶ Assessment of training transfer – the extent to which participants in the training have been able to  apply the knowledge and skills (i.e. the extent of competency) to their work outside of the training  – should be conducted alongside training implementation.  ▶ Training should be offered preferably during normal paid working hours. Training may need to be  repeated periodically or refreshed; however, there is a need for further research on duration in  order to indicate the ideal frequency of repetition.  ▶ Senior leadership commitment is required to encourage other managers to utilize the training and  to culturally sustain the effects of training. ▶ Manager training for mental health can be delivered via face-to-face, digital or blended methods.  ▶ Manager training for mental health can be delivered as part of on-the-job training or can be  integrated within relevant curricula for training prospective managers or leaders (or other preemployment training). Manager training for mental health Training managers to support their workers’ mental health should be  delivered to improve managers’ knowledge, attitudes and behaviours for  mental health and to improve workers’ help-seeking behaviours. Strong recommendation, moderate-certainty of evidence

             27 Recommendations for training managers Evidence and rationale Key question 4 investigated whether training managers  has a beneficial impact on outcomes for managers and  workers (Annex 3). Two broad categories of manager  training were identified during the review: 1) manager  training for mental health, which comprises components  such as mental health and psychosocial risks (e.g. job  stressors) knowledge, early identification and response  to emotional distress, taking appropriate actions to  respond to distress (including referral to other sources of  support), and communication and active listening skills;  and 2) leadership-oriented training, which is a form of  human resource management training aimed at improving  manager-worker interactions, and managers’ capacity  to design a work environment and work organization in  favour of health and well-being.   The evidence for manager training for mental health  compared to no training/wait list control was extracted  from one meta-analysis (77) which was updated for the  purpose of these guidelines. Evidence for leadershiporiented training compared to no training/wait list control  was extracted from a Cochrane review (78) (web Annex).   For manager training for mental health, moderatecertainty evidence suggested strong beneficial effects on  managers’ knowledge for mental health. Strong effects  were observed from very low- certainty evidence on  managers’ skills/behaviours for supporting workers. Highcertainty evidence pointed towards a small positive  effect on managers’ stigmatizing attitudes towards mental  health. High-certainty evidence also showed a very small  significant effect on supervisee-reported mental health  outcomes favouring the intervention. Low-certainty  evidence from one study suggested substantial benefits  of manager training for mental health on workers’  subsequent help-seeking behaviour (79). For workrelated outcomes, low-certainty evidence from one study  indicated a marginally significant reduction in perceptions  of job insecurity in workers, and there was no effect on  workers’ job performance in two other trials.    For leadership-oriented training, only results for workrelated outcomes were identified. Very low-certainty  evidence from individual trials showed that there  were small positive effects on workers’ organizational  commitment, work-related motivation and engagement;  however, most effects (from three out of five studies)  were not statistically significant. In turn, no effects were  observed on workers’ job satisfaction, turnover intention,  team effectiveness or work–life effectiveness (i.e. time  spent between work and personal life).   Overall, no outcomes were available for adverse effects,  change in leadership style, positive mental health, quality  of life, substance use or suicidal behaviours. No direct  evidence was available on the harms of implementing  manager training. 

28 Guidelines on mental health at work Evidence-to-decision considerations Both managers and workers value the outcomes that  manager training for mental health seeks to achieve and  have fewer concerns regarding this intervention than other  types of interventions. Managers express a preference to  receive further information about mental health and how to  support their workers through training (web Annex: Values  and preferences survey). Yet there is hesitation from some  managers regarding whether such training and the actions of  supporting a worker are within the role of their job, possibly  owing to lack of awareness of what the training involves and  a lack of awareness of the mechanisms by which the job  stressors (psychosocial risks) can have an impact on workers.   Managers vary in their preferences as to how to access such  training (e.g. individually, in groups, digitally, face-to-face  or blended approaches). A variety of training durations are  offered, ranging from 2.25 hours to 14 hours, with delivery  in single sessions or over periods of up to 10 weeks (77) and  with varying licensure/commission costs of training packages.  The modality of training varies between didactic educational  learning and skills-based practical learning. Such variability  has an impact on resource requirements. No reviews directly  examined cost-effectiveness. For health equity, equality and discrimination, there were  no identified analyses that investigated the differential  benefits between subgroups of managers or their workers  based on sociodemographic characteristics (such as gender  or race). Manager training for the benefit of workers’ health  can include training on equality and diversity (80), and  human rights-based training with respect to mental health  conditions. However no included studies in the reviews  considered these elements. All identified studies within the  reviews were carried out in high-income countries, usually  in medium-to-large organizations.   It was noted that feasibility may be challenging in smaller  enterprises which may lack resources to participate in such  training without closer inspection and mitigation of the  barriers (81). In this situation, managers across multiple  smaller enterprises could combine resources to participate in  such training – such as through group occupational services.  Such training could be offered during pre-employment or onthe-job training, including in management curricula. Training  which improves managers’ attitudes to, and knowledge of  mental health may improve the uptake of other levels of  interventions available for workers by mitigating concerns  about stigma or retaliation (web Annex: Implementation  review). It is likely that the sustainability of training effects  requires senior leadership to support behaviour changes  in managers as a result of their training (web Annex:  Implementation review). In additional evidence, the training  effects of one-time training for managers appear to diminish  after 6 months, suggesting that a biannual repetition of  training may be needed as a minimum to sustain effects (82).  

             29 Recommendations for training managers The benefit of manager training for mental health on  manager attitudes (reduced stigma) and improvement  of skills/behaviours (non-discrimination) is aligned with  universal human rights principles and would facilitate the  implementation of the UNCRPD Article 27. Including human  rights components in the training alongside efforts to reduce  discrimination through improving knowledge, attitudes and  skills/behaviours may strengthen managers’ knowledge of  human rights principles for mental health, although this was  not explicitly included in the interventions examined by the  evidence. For sociocultural acceptability, there is indirect  evidence that mental health interventions can be adapted  to various cultures, and there are methodologies for how  cultural adaptations should take place. These methodologies  may prove pertinent for potentially adapting manager  training in contexts where there is limited openness for  personal discussion in work settings (83).  The GDG concluded that a strong recommendation for  manager training for mental health was warranted. The  overall certainty of evidence was considered moderate, and  the benefits on knowledge, attitudes, skills/behaviours and  workers’ help-seeking behaviours outweighed the possible  harms. No recommendation was made at this time for  leadership-oriented training owing to there being no available  desirable effects on health outcomes and mixed desirable  effects on work-related outcomes. The GDG concluded that  leadership-oriented training is designed for developing  better leadership skills in managing and improving working  conditions and by setting the tone of the organizational  culture. However, substantially more research is required  which includes the impact of such training on workers’  mental health outcomes.

5 RECOMMENDATION 30 Guidelines on mental health at work Training managers to support the mental health of health, humanitarian and  emergency workers should be delivered to improve managers’ knowledge,  attitudes and behaviours for mental health.   Strong recommendation, moderate-certainty of evidence Key remarks: ▶ Recommendation 4 and its key remarks on manager training are relevant for managers of at-risk  workers. However, unlike in Recommendation 4, there was no available evidence for the impact  of manager training on workers’ help-seeking behaviours.    Implementation remarks:   ▶ All common implementation remarks, as indicated under Recommendation 4, apply. ▶ Inflexible face-to-face delivery may be difficult for this population who are by the nature of their  work inherently shift workers, and their clients may be dispersed in different locations from their  supervisors. Flexible, brief or digital delivery may be feasible to access training. ▶ Proactive approaches are needed to minimize stigma and increase mental health knowledge in  these work settings.  ▶ Funding or person-coverage for this population may need to be coordinated to allow for  participation in programmes during the working day. Training can also be delivered as part of preservice vocational training or study/education, on-the-job continued professional training or predeployment training. Training should be adapted to reflect the context of the different sectors.  Manager Training for Mental Health Manager training for health,  humanitarian and emergency workers

             31 Recommendations for training managers Evidence and rationale Key question 5 investigated whether manager training  in selective at-risk sectors has a beneficial impact on  outcomes for managers and workers (Annex 3). The  evidence for manager training for mental health15 in  at-risk sectors compared to no training/wait list control  and for two other types of manager training for mental  health –mental health awareness training for managers16  compared to peer-led manager training (e.g. increasing  awareness of the lived experience of mental health  conditions, delivered by people with lived experience)  – was extracted from one meta-analysis (77) which was  updated for the purpose of these guidelines. Evidence for  leadership-oriented training compared to no training/wait  list control was extracted from two systematic reviews (78,  84) (web Annex).  For manager training for mental health, a moderate  beneficial effect from low-certainty evidence was observed  on managers’ knowledge for mental health. As a result of  the training, managers’ skills/behaviours for supporting  at-risk workers improved (small effect, moderate certainty  of evidence) as did their stigmatizing attitudes for mental  health (moderate effects, high certainty of evidence). Small  effects from moderate-certainty evidence for one trial (85)  suggested that manager training did contribute to the  reduction of work-related absence time (but not to nonwork-related absence) over 6 months in at-risk workers.  There was little very low-certainty evidence to suggest any  superiority between  mental health awareness training  for managers compared to peer-led manager training for  mental health knowledge or stigmatizing attitudes (i.e.  both types of training were equally beneficial on these  outcomes). For leadership-oriented training, very lowcertainty evidence indicated mixed effects from individual  trials on at-risk workers’ mental health symptoms, with  one trial suggesting small effects favouring training and  another indicating no effect. For work-related outcomes,  low-certainty evidence pointed towards small positive  effects on job satisfaction or turnover.  Overall, no outcomes were reported for adverse effects,  at-risk workers’ help-seeking behaviours, change in  leadership style, positive mental health, quality of life,  substance use or suicidal behaviours. No direct evidence  was available on the harms of implementing manager  training in at-risk sectors.  15 Components of training for 1) manager training for mental health and 3) leadership-oriented training are described under Recommendation 4.  16 Mental health awareness training for managers included manualised training taught by trained facilitators focusing on awareness of the signs and symptoms of mental health  conditions and how to support an individual experiencing difficulty with their mental health. 

32 Guidelines on mental health at work Evidence-to-decision considerations Evidence-to-decision considerations were largely similar  to those for Recommendation 4 with the following  considerations highlighted as relevant for the at-risk sector of  health, humanitarian and emergency workers and those who  manage them. Manager training was considered especially  pertinent for the selective at-risk areas that operate with  strong team-oriented work and where seniority is typically  based on technical speciality over management skills.  Both managers and workers value the outcomes that  manager training for mental health seeks to address,  and managers express a preference for receiving further  information about mental health and how to support their  workers through training. Minimal concerns regarding  this type of intervention were expressed by at-risk  workers. Resource requirements are similar to those  for Recommendation 4 on manager training for mental  health (77) and repetition of training at least twice a year  may be indicated by positive outcomes persisting over  time with significant effects observed between 2- and 6-  month follow-up (86). No reviews directly examined costeffectiveness, yet a single trial which investigated the impact  of manager training for mental health in emergency services  demonstrated a return on investment of UK£ 9.98 for every  UK£ 1 spent on training (85).  For health equity, equality and discrimination, there  were no identified analyses of the health, humanitarian and  emergency sectors that investigated differential benefits  between sociodemographic subgroups such as gender  or race. This is a notable gap for these sectors where the  “delivered by women, led by men” practice prevails (87). All  identified studies within the reviews were carried out in highincome countries and included health or emergency workers  who were primarily client-facing. There were no studies  including the humanitarian sector. There is wider qualitative  evidence which indicates that humanitarian workers express  a desire for improved leadership and better communication  as a pathway to better mental health (65).    The feasibility of manager training for mental health  in occupations which are subject to long working hours  and shift work is a concern, especially in overburdened  health systems or in countries facing active humanitarian  emergencies. Brevity and accessibility will be relevant to  promote the feasibility of training. When incorporated into  other mandatory training for at-risk workers, training may  facilitate enrolment when compared with low enrolment  rates in voluntary training as observed in police personnel  (web Annex: Implementation review). However, managers  who receive training can have a further positive effect by  increasing the likelihood that their workers will access other  support for mental health, particularly in sectors and work  environments where concerns about confidentiality and  stigma are high (web Annex: Implementation review). Another  opportunity for these sectors is to integrate manager mental  health training into pre-service training (i.e. during vocational  training, as part of vocational study) or before deployment or  on-the-job continual training, although this was not examined  by the reviews per se (84). 

             33 Recommendations for training managers The desirable effects of manager training for mental health  are aligned with universal human rights principles. For  sociocultural acceptability, cultures of machoism or  patriarchal-normed cultures may influence the likelihood of  uptake and enactment of such training, which underscores  the need for such training to exist alongside efforts to improve  representative leadership policies.  The GDG made a strong recommendation for manager  training for mental health in the identified at-risk sectors in  view of the evidence-to-decision considerations and taking  account of the strong recommendation for manager training.  The overall certainty of evidence was considered moderate,  and the benefits of receiving training on knowledge, attitudes  and skills/behaviours outweighed the possible harms. Since  evidence for the subsequent impact on workers’ mental  health and work-related outcomes was mixed, or data were  not available on the other key outcomes (e.g. help-seeking  behaviour), these outcomes were not included in the  recommendation. As with Recommendation 4 on manager  training for mental health, the GDG acknowledged the  limitations of evidence for leadership-oriented training. 

34 Guidelines on mental health at work

Recommendations  for training workers

6 RECOMMENDATION 36 Guidelines on mental health at work Training workers in mental health literacy and awareness may be delivered  to improve trainees’ mental health-related knowledge and attitudes at work,  including stigmatizing attitudes. Conditional recommendation, very low-certainty of evidence Key remarks: ▶ Training of workers in mental health literacy and awareness is designed to improve knowledge  about mental health, reduce stigmatizing attitudes in recipients of the training, and enable  workers to support themselves or colleagues appropriately (e.g. through identifying the signs of  emotional distress and taking appropriate action such as seeking or facilitating help from formal  or informal sources). The training is not designed for workers to become mental health-care  providers or to diagnose or treat mental disorders. The limited evidence that is available suggests  that such training may not have an impact on the (self-reported) likelihood of providing help  to others; more quality research is needed to address this. There was no evidence available for  whether such training benefits colleagues’ outcomes. Common implementation remarks for workers training for mental health literacy and awareness: ▶ The target audience of the guidelines should be aware that training for workers in mental health  literacy and awareness should be checked for its evidence base (i.e. quality and effectiveness) prior to  delivery to workers.  ▶ Assessment of training transfer – i.e. the extent to which participants in the training have been able to  apply the knowledge and skills (i.e. the extent of competency) to their work outside of the training –  should be conducted alongside training implementation.  ▶ Training should be offered preferably during normal paid working hours.  ▶ Senior leadership commitment is required to encourage workers to utilize the training, and to  culturally sustain the effects of training. ▶ Such training benefits individual workers themselves and should be delivered with this aim in mind.  There is not yet substantial evidence to indicate that such training should be used to appoint workers  as informal helpers for their colleagues.  If workers are to be trained to initially respond to co-workers  in distress, they should preferably be provided with mental health supervision or support to manage  boundaries with colleagues, identify needs and channels for referral, confidentiality and the impact on  their own mental health. ▶ Training can be periodically repeated or refreshed. However frequency of repetition should be  informed by improved research on the duration of effects.  ▶ Training could also include administrative information alerting workers as to where they can find  relevant resources and policies in their work or local community settings.  ▶ Such training may be beneficial in contexts where there is reduced incentive to address mental health  over and above physical health and safety concerns at work, such as in some informal work sectors.  However, raising awareness of mental health should be conducted only when there are options for  mental health referral support available to workers.   Manager Training for Mental Health Training for workers in mental health  literacy and awareness

             37 Recommendations for training workers Evidence and rationale Key question 6 investigated whether training of workers  has a beneficial impact on outcomes for those who  receive training and for their colleagues (Annex 3). Such  training is designed to increase workers’ mental health  literacy (knowledge and awareness) and attitudes (e.g.  anti-stigma), it includes early identification and response  to emotional distress in the trainee and/or colleagues,  and how to provide initial support through appropriate  actions, including referral information. One systematic  review informed the evidence for the comparison of worker  mental health training compared to wait list control (88)  (web Annex). For training participants, low-certainty evidence  suggested small-to-moderate beneficial effects on  workers’ knowledge for mental health. Very low-certainty  evidence indicated that there was a small effect of training  on improving stigmatizing attitudes for mental health.  However, low-certainty evidence indicated that mental  health literacy and awareness training did not change  the (self-reported) provision of help by trainees to others.  There was very low certainty of evidence from individual  studies which pointed towards mixed effects (no effect and  positive effect) on training recipients’ mental health.  No outcomes were reported for adverse effects, change  in help-seeking behaviours by colleagues who had been  supported by a training recipient, positive mental health,  quality of life, substance use, suicidal behaviours or  work-related outcomes. No direct evidence was available  on the harms of implementing mental health literacy and  awareness training for workers.  Additional evidence, not suitable for GRADE, indicated  that such training – often called “gatekeeper training” – is  described in published and unpublished studies for the  prevention of suicide in workplaces (89). A few studies of  such training for the purposes of suicide prevention at  work, indicated beneficial effects on knowledge, stigma  and help-seeking behaviour. 

38 Guidelines on mental health at work Evidence-to-decision considerations Workers value highly the outcomes that worker training  for mental health seeks to address. Such interventions  are popular in work settings, particularly as there is great  emphasis on reducing stigma for mental health in work  settings. Yet, there is also high value on “change in helpseeking behaviours of colleague” which was an outcome that  was not available within the included evidence. Resource requirements may vary according to the mode of  delivery (group, digital, face to face) and length of training,  with durations in the evidence review ranging from 1 hour  to 2 days. The licensure status of available programmes has  an impact on resource requirements: while some training  is relatively inexpensive, some can cost considerable time  and money when delivered to whole workforces. No reviews  directly examined cost-effectiveness; however, narrative  evidence from Hanisch et al. (88) indicated that one study had  evaluated its anti-stigma training as cost-effective.   For health equity, equality and discrimination, all  identified studies within the reviews were carried out in highincome countries, usually in medium-to-large organizations.  No identified analyses investigated differential benefits or  harms between sociodemographic subgroups (e.g. gender  or race). However, there is evidence that such training could  be adapted to LMICs and to non-anglophone/non-European  cultures (92) and there are indications that such training may  be welcome among the organized informal sector (web Annex).  For feasibility, smaller enterprises may lack resources to  participate in such training and may benefit from group  occupational services between multiple enterprises to  conduct the training. In additional evidence, the long-term  training effect at 12 months was mixed, with 6 months of  follow-up being common in studies.  The ability of mental health literacy and awareness  training to reduce stigma against people living with mental  health conditions is in line with universal  human rights  principles. For sociocultural acceptability, there are  emerging concerns as to whether trainees understand their  role following training, and whether they are provided  with formal or informal supervisory support (i.e. for those  persons then designated as informal peer support providers  in workplaces). Trained workers who may overextend their  role may lack the necessary skills to manage the situations  they face without supportive (non-managerial) supervision  to manage cases, such as from a mental health professional.  This is in contrast to manager training, where managers  are in a direct position of power which places their workers  under their responsibility.   The GDG provided a conditional recommendation for worker  training for mental health. The overall certainty of evidence  was considered very low, and the benefits on knowledge and  attitudes outweighed the possible harms. It is to be noted  that that the effects on “providing help to others” may not  have been captured due to the limitations of study follow-up  periods. Additional evidence in Morgan et al. (90) indicates  moderate improvements in trainees’ confidence/intention to  support a colleague prospectively, where confidence alone  may not translate into behaviour (although it is a proxy) (91).  Currently such training is suitable for addressing stigmatizing  knowledge/attitudes at the workplace – a necessary barrier  to overcome for the successful implementation of other  interventions for mental health at work. The GDG noted that  further evidence is needed to investigate the effectiveness of  this training in relation to other outcomes such as influencing  help-seeking behaviours.  

7 RECOMMENDATION              39 Recommendations for training workers Training health, humanitarian and emergency workers in mental health literacy  and awareness may be delivered to improve trainees’ mental health-related  knowledge and attitudes at work, including stigmatizing attitudes.    Conditional recommendation, very low-certainty of evidence Key remarks: ▶ Training at-risk workers in mental health literacy and awareness is designed to reduce stigma  in workers, and to enable workers to support themselves or colleagues appropriately (through  identifying the signs of emotional distress and taking appropriate action such as seeking or  facilitating help from formal or informal sources). It is not designed for workers to become mental  health-care providers or to diagnose or treat mental disorders. The limited evidence that is  available suggests that such training benefits positive attitudes towards seeking help but may  not have an impact on the actual (self-reported) seeking of help for oneself or providing help to  others, and more quality research is needed to address this.  ▶ However, training health, humanitarian and emergency workers in mental health knowledge,  attitudes and skills may benefit their daily client-facing work, as the objectives of the training  may be transferable to members of the public in distress.  Implementation remarks: ▶ All common implementation remarks, as indicated under Recommendation 6, apply. ▶ Training could be delivered as part of pre-service training, on-the-job training/study, predeployment training or post-deployment follow-up.   Manager Training for Mental Health Training for health, humanitarian and emergency  workers in mental health literacy and awareness

40 Guidelines on mental health at work Evidence and rationale Key question 7 investigated whether mental health literacy  and awareness training for at-risk workers had a beneficial  impact on outcomes (Annex 3). No systematic reviews  were available that explored the effect of interventions  on civilian health, emergency and humanitarian workers’  knowledge, attitudes and skills/behaviours that improve  their own or their colleagues’ mental health. Two RCTs  evaluating these outcomes were identified through  systematic searches to inform the evidence comparing   contact-based workplace education17 versus mental  health literacy and awareness training (93) and workplace  mental health awareness training18 versus training as  usual (94) (web Annex). For contact-based workplace education compared to  mental health literacy and awareness training, very  low-certainty evidence indicated that the interventions  were similar with regard to their small positive effects  for improving mental health knowledge. Likewise, the  beneficial impact on stigmatizing attitudes for mental  health was small at both 3- and 6- month follow-up and,  while the interventions were comparable, contact-based  workplace education had marginally better effects on  attitudes at 6- month follow-up. No effects were observed  on skills/behaviours in providing help to others, for either  training approach (very low certainty of evidence).   For workplace mental health awareness training versus  training as usual, low-certainty evidence demonstrated  a small effect in favour of workplace mental health  awareness training on training recipients’ attitudes to seek  help for themselves. This effect was no longer observed at  3-year follow-up. No effects were observed on changing  training recipients’ actual help-seeking behaviours (very  low certainty of evidence). In addition, very low-certainty  evidence found there was no effect on reducing mental  health symptoms in training recipients at 6-month or  3-year follow-up.  Overall, no outcomes were reported for adverse effects,  help-seeking behaviours by colleagues, positive mental  health, quality of life, substance use, suicidal behaviours or  work-related outcomes. No direct evidence was available  on the harms of implementing mental health literacy and  awareness training in at-risk workers.  17 Contact-based workplace education involved six face-to-face sessions and five online sessions delivered by peers living with mental health conditions, and included mental  health literacy, early identification and help-seeking resources.  18 Workplace mental health awareness training involved watching three videos – of approximately 30 minutes in total – of people in a similar profession to the end-users  discussing personal experiences of work challenges, adverse events and how seeking-help was beneficial.

             41 Recommendations for training workers Evidence-to-decision considerations At-risk workers value the outcomes that worker training for  mental health seeks to address. Such interventions – for the  purposes of addressing stigma – are popular in work settings.  Resource requirements may vary according to the mode  of delivery (group, digital, face to face, blended) and length  of training, whether licensure is required, and by the varying  durations which were reported in the evidence as ranging from  30 minutes to brief sessions delivered over a 21-month period.  No reviews directly examined cost-effectiveness, yet indirect  evidence from a single uncontrolled study in an at-risk sector  sample suggested cost savings of receiving such training (95).  For health equity, equality and discrimination, all  identified studies within the reviews were carried out  in high-income countries. The included studies focused  on health and emergency workers. Additional evidence  indicated that pre-deployment training benefits humanitarian  workers’ confidence in coping with disasters (96). No  identified analyses investigated differential benefits between  sociodemographic subgroups (such as gender or race). There  is emerging evidence that such training could be adapted to  LMICs and in non-anglophone/non-European cultures (92).  Notably, addressing knowledge and attitudes for mental  health is included in training that seeks to build the capacity  of primary care health workers in LMICs to support people,  rather than colleagues, for their mental health – suggesting  that such training could be feasible (97). For feasibility, the  barrier of high workloads and difficulties in leaving work  unattended for those in client-facing roles can affect access to  training during working hours unless protected time or staff  coverage is provided at the organizational level (web Annex:  Implementation review).    The ability of mental health literacy and awareness training  to reduce stigma for mental health is in line with universal  human rights principles. For sociocultural acceptability,  mental health self-stigma is reportedly problematic among  health-sector workers (98). However, a dual benefit for this  at-risk group may serve to increase willingness to participate  in training because the training of health, humanitarian and  emergency workers in mental health knowledge, attitudes and  skills may additionally benefit their daily front-facing work of  service delivery. Peer support programmes in these sectors are  also popular. While evidence for the success of peer support  programmes remains difficult to evaluate due to the diversity  of interventions and outcomes, there appears to be some  indication of short-term benefits (99).  The GDG made a conditional recommendation for at-risk  worker training for mental health. The overall certainty of  evidence was very low, and the benefits on knowledge and  attitudes outweighed the possible harms – i.e. that training  would support trainees to improve their knowledge in mental  health, thus increasing the likelihood of early detection of  symptoms, and their knowledge (but not action) on what to  do about such symptoms (e.g. the likelihood of seeking help).  Since the findings match those found in Recommendation 6,  there was consideration of whether there should be a single  recommendation. However, the GDG felt it important to  highlight specifically the need to have a recommendation for  this group. 

42 Guidelines on mental health at work

© WHO / Blink Media - Tali Kimelman Recommendations  for individual  interventions

8 RECOMMENDATION 44 Guidelines on mental health at work 8A   Universally delivered psychosocial interventions that aim to build  workers’ skills in stress management – such as interventions based on  mindfulness or cognitive behavioural approaches – may be considered  for workers to promote positive mental health, reduce emotional distress  and improve work effectiveness.    Conditional recommendation, low-certainty of evidence 8B   Opportunities for leisure-based physical activity – such as resistance  training, strength- training, aerobic training, walking or yoga – may be  considered for workers to improve mental health and work ability.  Conditional recommendation, very low-certainty of evidence Key remarks: ▶ Universally delivered interventions may help to reach a large proportion of a workforce and may  be less likely to cause stigmatization as entry to the programmes is not predetermined by mental  health status.  ▶ The target audience of the guidelines should be aware that interventions for workers in building  skills in stress management should be checked for their evidence base (quality and effectiveness)  prior to delivery to workers. ▶ WHO guidelines on physical activity and sedentary behaviour (2020) includes recommendations  for physical activity in working-age persons and notes that the relevant recommendations confer  health benefits, including reduction of symptoms of anxiety and depression. Where resources are  available, Recommendation 8B applies to activities that can be conducted within work settings or  where work facilitates external opportunities to participate in these physical activities.   Universal individual interventions

             45 Recommendations for individual interventions Common implementation remarks for all individual interventions:  ▶ Duration of effects are heterogenous and unclear. Consequently, workers would require flexible and  continuous access to individual interventions as one-time delivery effects may not be sustained.  ▶ Use of electronic prompts (such as mobile telephone or email messaging) can be used to  encourage workers to engage in interventions, such as physical exercise. ▶ Intervention content and delivery requires cultural contextual adaptations prior to  implementation and workers should be included in the planning of delivery.  ▶ Individual interventions (psychosocial and physical activity) can be feasibly delivered face to  face, electronically (guided or unguided), in a group or individually accessed. ▶ Providers of face-to-face or guided delivery of psychosocial interventions should be competent  to deliver these interventions and should be subject to clinical supervision. ▶ Digital interventions (e.g. online, applications) may offer feasible access for shift workers, selfemployed persons or “off-site” workers.  ▶ Interventions could be integrated within existing workplace health promotion programmes.  Where resources are low for implementation in work settings, provision of guidance or  interventions may be supported by the public health system, where there is capacity. ▶ Workers should preferably be allowed time to access individual interventions.  Su-group remarks: ▶ Equity in delivery or uptake of individual interventions would need to be considered for  “low-status workers” versus “high-status workers”, for shift workers, informal workers or selfemployed persons.  ▶ Informal female workers may have less access to digital resources within family units compared to  their male counterparts; face-to-face delivery may be preferable in these and similar circumstances.  ▶ Informal workers may not be able to take time away from work to engage in the interventions;  consequently, community-based organizations such as cooperatives or the health system may  promote individual interventions in a proactive manner and could themselves be trained to  deliver individual interventions that are designed for delivery by non-specialist providers.

46 Guidelines on mental health at work Evidence and rationale Key question 8 investigated whether universallydelivered individual interventions (such as psychosocial  interventions, leisure-based physical activity, or healthy  lifestyle promotion) had a beneficial impact on outcomes  (Annex 3). Evidence was extracted from eight systematic  reviews. Compared to control conditions (varying between  treatment as usual, wait list control, other interventions, no  treatment control), evidence was available for universallydelivered psychosocial interventions (such as cognitive  behavioural therapy, relaxation, interpersonal soft skills,  stress management, role-related skills, and expressive  writing) (100, 101), for mindfulness and contemplative  interventions (60, 102, 103) and cognitive behavioural  therapy (CBT) (60, 103); e- psychosocial interventions (such  as Internet-based or other digital-based cognitive therapy  or CBT, stress and coping, mindfulness, psychoeducation,  problem-solving training, positive psychology interventions,  and acceptance and commitment therapy) (104, 105);   e-health stress management (103); physical activity and  lifestyle interventions (such as general physical exercise,  specific resistance training at work) (106);  physical activity  interventions (such as walking, yoga, resistance training,  aerobic and weight-training exercise) (60) and combined  psychosocial and/or physical activity and/or lifestyle  interventions (60) (web Annex). For universally-delivered psychosocial interventions, very  low-certainty evidence showed that there were small effects  on burnout exhaustion and improvement in symptoms  of insomnia.  For universally-delivered mindfulness  and other contemplative interventions, there was lowcertainty evidence for moderate improvements in symptoms  of general distress, overall mental health symptoms (i.e.  depression, anxiety and stress) and very low-certainty  evidence for a strong improvement in subjective well-being.  For universally delivered CBT, mainly very low- to lowcertainty evidence showed a small effect of CBT on overall  mental health symptoms (i.e. depression, anxiety and stress)  and subjective well-being (very low certainty of evidence).   For e-psychosocial interventions, evidence ranging  from very low to moderate certainty demonstrated small  effects on mental health (symptoms of stress, depression,  burnout). There was low-certainty evidence for small-tomoderate benefits to positive mental health (well-being  and mindfulness) and high certainty of small effects on  work-related effectiveness. Additional evidence within the  included reviews indicated no difference between CBTbased approaches and other psychological approaches  on psychological health and work effectiveness outcomes  (104). Likewise, CBT showed a very small, significant positive  effect, and mindfulness-based interventions showed  a moderate-to-large positive effect (103). No desirable  outcomes were identified for  e-health stress management. For combined psychosocial and/or physical activity and/ or lifestyle interventions, very low-certainty evidence  demonstrated a moderate effect on improving positive  mental health and a strong effect on improving quality of  life. For physical activity and/or lifestyle interventions,  moderate-certainty evidence indicated a small effect on  work ability.  Overall, no outcomes were reported for adverse effects,  substance use or suicidal behaviours. No direct evidence  was identified on the harms for implementation of  universally-delivered psychosocial, physical activity or  lifestyle interventions. 

             47 Recommendations for individual interventions Evidence-to-decision considerations Workers value access to universally-delivered individual  interventions. However, they are less likely to value  these interventions if they are not provided alongside  organizational or managerial interventions (web Annex:  Values and preferences survey). This is due to concerns  that receiving individual interventions only is indicative  that workers may be to blame for their own mental health  status. These interventions form one part of self-care or selfmanagement options, but alone they would not constitute  comprehensive delivery.  Resources vary according to delivery method (face-to-face,  self-administered, digital, provider expertise), whether  equipment is required (e.g. for physical activity) and by  duration – one review indicated a mean duration of 10  weeks for e-psychosocial interventions (104) and 4–6  months for physical activity programmes (60). Followup periods were short and the duration of effects was  heterogeneous and unclear, suggesting that interventions  should be available as and when people need them. No  direct evidence was available for cost-effectiveness. Wider  sources suggested for workplace stress management (single  or multicomponent which covers but is not exclusive to  universal delivery), an estimated return on investment of  UK£ 2 for every UK£ 1 invested in England (108) and a 138%  return on investment in a review of over [PHONE_REDACTED]workers  across 12 countries (109).   For health equity, equality and discrimination, only one  included review conducted a subgroup analysis solely  for gender (105), showing that gender had no significant  moderating effects on outcomes for e-health psychosocial  interventions. Although the majority of the work was  obtained in high-income settings, and one review indicated  that 40% of providers were specialists (100), wider  literature indicates that brief psychosocial interventions  can be feasibly implemented in lower-resource settings  through non-specialist providers (110). Digitally-provided  interventions may extend reach to workers based in rural  settings or home-offices. Equity in delivery or uptake of  individual interventions would need to be considered for  “low-status workers” versus “high-status workers”, and for  shift workers, informal workers or the self-employed. For  example, face-to-face delivery for shift workers may result  in less uptake compared to self-accessed digital delivery,  whereas the former it may be preferable for workers with  lower digital literacy. Informal female workers may have less  access to digital resources within family units, compared to  male counterparts; therefore face-to-face delivery – such  as through workers cooperatives or community-based  organizations – may be preferable in these and related  circumstances (web Annex). Self-access or referral to such  interventions may in general reduce stigma-based barriers  for accessing support for mental health. For employers  or workers with limited resources, provision of guidance  or interventions could be supported by the public health  sector, where there is capacity. Finally on feasibility, one  included review indicated 45% completion of e-psychosocial  interventions, which was in line with engagement rates  seen in digital health interventions (104). Emerging  evidence indicates that brief individual interventions (selfadministered or guided support) are feasible in SMEs (111).  Access to evidence-based interventions to prevent distress  is in line with universal human rights principles, and  universal delivery removes barriers of stigma for mental  health or for help-seeking. For sociocultural acceptability,  the content and delivery of brief psychosocial interventions 

48 Guidelines on mental health at work can be adapted to local population cultures and needs  (110). The adaptability of the content and delivery of  such interventions specific to the work sector or design  is important for uptake (web Annex: implementation  review). For physical activity interventions, there is  less evidence from LMICs, economically disadvantaged  workers and workers with disabilities on the effectiveness  of implementation requirements needed to serve these  communities (112).  The GDG concluded that a conditional recommendation  for universally-delivered psychosocial interventions was  warranted. The overall certainty of evidence was considered  low, and the benefits on mental health outcomes and  work-related outcomes outweighed the harms. The GDG  also concluded, in the absence of identification of any  direct harms, to conditionally recommend leisure-based  physical activity for the benefits on work-related outcomes.  Although findings were not as expected in terms of mental  health outcomes, this decision was in balance with existing  recommendations in the WHO guidelines on physical activity  and sedentary behaviour (112). Although the majority of  effects were small, the conclusion remains in line with the  wider field of universal prevention and promotion in mental  health (107). Despite the small effects, universal individual  interventions were also considered beneficial since they  minimize the stigma of access to the interventions (since  mental health status does not determine entry or access to  the interventions).

9 RECOMMENDATION              49 Recommendations for individual interventions 9A  Universally delivered psychosocial interventions that aim to build  workers’ skills in stress management – such as interventions based on  mindfulness or cognitive behavioural approaches – may be considered  for health, humanitarian and emergency workers to promote positive  mental health and reduce emotional distress. Conditional recommendation, low-certainty of evidence 9B  Psychosocial interventions – such as stress management and self-care  training, or communication skills training – may be made available for  health, humanitarian and emergency workers who are experiencing  emotional distress.  Conditional recommendation, low-certainty of evidence Key remarks: ▶ There is evidence for the sustainability of improvements in outcomes at short-term and mediumterm follow-up time points (≤ 6 months) but there is limited evidence for long-term lasting effects. ▶ Recommendation 10 for indicated interventions would also apply to Recommendation 9B. In  addition, WHO guidelines on conditions specifically related to stress (113) recommends against the  use of psychological debriefing following potentially traumatic events: Psychological debriefing  should not be used as an intervention to reduce the risk of post-traumatic stress, anxiety or depressive  symptoms in people recently exposed to a traumatic event (strong recommendation, very low certainty  of evidence). Individual interventions for health,  humanitarian and emergency workers

50 Guidelines on mental health at work Implementation remarks: ▶ All common implementation remarks, as indicated under Recommendation 8, apply.  ▶ There is considerable stigma in these sectors for seeking support for mental health conditions or  disclosing to employers. Universal delivery of psychosocial interventions may benefit workers in  such high-stigma working environments. Likewise, self-referral options or digital interventions may  ameliorate perceived stigma and barriers to accessing face-to-face support (e.g. where there may  be concerns about confidentiality and privacy).  ▶ Inflexible face-to-face delivery may be difficult for this population who are largely shift workers and  client-facing. Flexible, brief or digital delivery may improve uptake. ▶ Proactive approaches are also needed to minimize stigma and increase mental health knowledge  in these work settings.  ▶ Funding or coverage for this population may need to be coordinated to allow for participation in  programmes during the working day. ▶ Universal interventions could be integrated within pre-service or on-the-job training in order to  improve stress management skill-building in preparation for work. ▶ It is unclear whether psychosocial interventions for at-risk workers with emotional distress should  be provided within or outside of work settings (e.g. providers internal to or external to the work  setting). Where feasible, options should be made available for both.  Subgroup considerations:  ▶ For employers with limited resources – such as local or national humanitarian organizations –  access to interventions may be provided by the public health sector or through shared resourcing  in group occupational services. 

             51 Recommendations for individual interventions Evidence and rationale Key question 9 investigated whether individual interventions  (such as psychosocial interventions, leisure-based physical  activity, or healthy lifestyle promotion) had a beneficial  impact on outcomes for at-risk workers (Annex 3). Evidence  was available for 1) universal delivery of individual  interventions for at-risk workers (selective–universal) and 2)  individual interventions for at-risk workers with emotional  distress (selective–indicated) (web Annex).  Evidence was extracted from eight systematic reviews.  Compared to control conditions (varying between  treatment as usual, wait list, other control interventions,  or no treatment control), evidence was available for:  1) universal-delivery of combined psychosocial and/or  physical activity and/or lifestyle promotion interventions  (such as cognitive behavioural therapy approaches, stress  reduction and resilience programmes) (114); 2) psychosocial  interventions (such as CBT approaches, mindfulness  interventions, stress management and self-care, attention  and interpretation therapy, and resilience-based training)  ([PHONE_REDACTED]; 3) mindfulness and other contemplative  interventions (102, 118–120); and 4) for indicated at-risk  workers, psychosocial interventions (such as facilitated  small group curricula, stress management and self-care  training, communication skills training and a belonging  intervention) (117).  For combined psychosocial and/or physical activity and/ or lifestyle promotion interventions, low-certainty data  indicated small effects on mental health outcomes (anxiety  symptoms) and moderate effects for stress. There were very  low-certainty data for moderate-to-large effects on positive  mental health (resilience and mindfulness, respectively).  For psychosocial interventions, the effects varied for mental  health outcomes where there was a very low certainty of  effect on a small reduction in depression symptoms, and a  moderate-sized effect on reducing stress. Low-to-moderate  certainty evidence indicated greater reductions on symptoms  of burnout (exhaustion). Very low-quality evidence suggested  that psychosocial interventions exhibited a small effect on  positive mental health (e.g. resilience, optimism, self-efficacy,  positive emotions). There was very low certainty in a small  effect on reducing suicidal ideation. There was low certainty  of no effect on adverse events. For mindfulness and other contemplative interventions,  there was moderate-certainty evidence indicating moderate  effects on reducing mental health outcomes (depression,  stress) and small effects on general distress and burnout.  While there was a moderate effect on anxiety, this evidence  was considered very low-certainty. There was low certainty  in the moderate improvements in positive mental health  (self-compassion).  For psychosocial interventions for indicated at-risk  workers, there was moderate certainty of effects on high  reductions in levels of burnout (exhaustion).  Overall, no outcomes were reported for substance use.  Psychosocial interventions for indicated at-risk workers  did not demonstrate the desired effect on burnout  depersonalization, whereas there was a moderate effect on  burnout exhaustion. No other direct harms were identified. 

52 Guidelines on mental health at work Evidence-to-decision considerations The evidence-to-decision considerations were largely  identical across all individual intervention recommendations  (8, 9 and 10). The additional unique considerations for  indicated individual interventions (workers with emotional  distress) are outlined in Recommendation 10.  In these at-risk sectors there can be a particular stigmatization  regarding disclosure of mental health due to concerns about  its impact on career progression (121). For this reason, there  is a preference among workers to self-refer to psychosocial  interventions (web Annex: Implementation review). Workers  also reported affordability and convenience as benefits of  these interventions although most data were from workers  in higher-resourced settings. There may be particular  barriers (to access individual interventions) faced by smaller  organizations or those with fewer resources, where “group  occupational health services” could be contracted through  pooling resources from multiple organizations or through  delivery from the public-health sector. The duration of such  interventions – which range from less than 5 hours to over 12  hours – is relevant for these organizations where time during  work may be limited due to client-facing roles (115).   For health equity, equality and discrimination, although  health workers represent a diverse group of professions,  most included research is based on those in direct clinical  care roles. Most included research was in high-income  settings, although additional evidence points to feasibility  in middle-income countries (33). Limited evidence  was available on the effectiveness for emergency and  humanitarian workers of differential benefits based on  sociodemographic subgroups (such as gender or race).  However, additional evidence points to the feasibility of  implementation in emergency workers (122). There is  evidence for a duration of effects of up to 6 months for  individual psychosocial interventions in at-risk workers  (115). Group-based delivery of psychosocial interventions  may be less feasible in these sectors owing to scheduling  difficulties for typical shift work (and if conducted can  be universally delivered to minimize stigma in highly  stigmatized settings (web Annex: Implementation review). The GDG concluded that a conditional recommendation was  warranted for individual interventions for at-risk workers,  both when universally delivered and when delivered to  an indicated population (i.e. at-risk workers in distress).  The overall certainty of evidence was considered to be  low and the benefits on mental health outcomes – and  positive mental health outcomes in the case of universallydelivered interventions – were considered to outweigh  the harms. The GDG did not consider there to be sufficient  substantial evidence to warrant a recommendation on  leisure-based physical activity interventions since, despite  the combination of psychosocial physical activity and  lifestyle promotion interventions, the vast majority were  psychosocial. The available literature also did not permit  disaggregating the effects by intervention type (e.g.  psychosocial versus physical). However, it was noted that  Recommendation 8 for universally delivered interventions  would also be applicable to this population. 

10 RECOMMENDATION              53 Recommendations for individual interventions 10A  For workers with emotional distress, psychosocial interventions such  as those based on mindfulness or cognitive behavioural approaches, or  problem-solving training, may be considered in order to reduce these  symptoms and improve work effectiveness. Conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence 10B  For workers with emotional distress, physical exercise, such as aerobic  training and weight-training, may be considered in order to reduce  these symptoms.  Conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence Key remarks:	 ▶ It is unclear whether indicated psychosocial interventions for workers with emotional distress  should be provided within or outside of work settings (i.e. by internal or external providers).  However, where feasible, both should be available to suit the preferences of workers. 	 ▶ WHO mhGAP guideline (123) provides recommendations on effective interventions for  depression, self-harm/suicide and substance use relevant to the general population (in lowresourced settings).  ▶ WHO guidelines on physical activity and sedentary behaviour (2020) includes recommendations  for physical activity in working-age persons and notes that the relevant recommendations confer  health benefits – including the reduction of symptoms of anxiety and depression. Individual interventions for workers  with emotional distress

54 Guidelines on mental health at work Evidence and rationale Key question 10 investigated whether indicated individuallevel interventions (such as psychosocial interventions,  leisure-based physical activity, or lifestyle promotion)  had a beneficial impact on outcomes for workers with  emotional distress (Annex 3). Evidence was extracted  from five systematic reviews. Compared to control  conditions (varying between treatment as usual, wait list,  other control interventions), evidence was available for  psychosocial interventions (e.g. mixed CBT interventions,  relaxation, interpersonal soft skills, role-related skills, aerobic  exercise and behaviour modification, and acceptance and  commitment therapy) (100, 124); for CBT (103, 124);  e-psychosocial interventions (e.g. cognitive therapy or CBT,  stress and coping, mindfulness, psychoeducation, problemsolving training, positive psychology, and acceptance and  commitment therapy) (104, 105); and e-stress management  (103) (web Annex).  For psychosocial interventions, there was low-certainty  evidence for small improvement in depression symptoms.  For CBT, (which was mostly delivered through e-health  formats) there was moderate-certainty evidence for  moderate improvements in depression. Additional evidence  in Nigatu et al. (124) indicated that the mode of delivery  affected efficacy in post-test measurements. Telephonedelivered psychosocial interventions showed greater  reductions in depression symptoms compared to computerdelivered interventions or in-person delivery.  For e-psychosocial interventions, there was very lowcertainty evidence for small effects on mental health  outcomes (symptoms of depression and anxiety); moderate  effects on burnout and a composite measure which  combined stress, depression and psychological stress;  and strong effects on outcomes of stress and insomnia  symptoms. Low-certainty evidence demonstrated a small  improvement in work effectiveness (defined as: work  engagement, productivity, job effectiveness). For e-stress  management interventions, there was very low-certainty  evidence to indicate a moderate effect on a combined  measure of depression, anxiety and stress symptoms.  Overall, no outcomes were reported for positive mental  health, quality of life, adverse effects, substance use or  suicidal behaviours. No direct harms of indicated individual  interventions were identified, although psychosocial  interventions did not demonstrate the expected effect on  improving “lack of personal accomplishment”, a subcriterion of burnout. 

             55 Recommendations for individual interventions Evidence-to-decision considerations The evidence-to-decision considerations were  largely identical across all individual intervention  recommendations (8, 9 and 10). Additional considerations  for indicated individual interventions are outlined here.  Consideration is given to the fact that entry into such  programmes is by meeting criteria for emotional distress  which may be stigmatizing if care is delivered in the work  setting. Therefore, in terms of sociocultural acceptability,  it is unclear whether such interventions are considered  acceptable at work – despite well-designed RCTs for workers  with emotional distress being conducted in workplaces with  no known reports of harms (such as perceptions or fears of  stigma or discrimination). No direct evidence was available on cost-effectiveness.  However, additional sources indicate that workplace  psychosocial interventions which include CBT are costsaving, and in some cases are cost-effective for depression  (126). For health equity, equality and discrimination,  while supervised (rather than unstructured, unsupervised)  exercise was included in indirect evidence as being  effective on symptoms of depression, such supervised  approaches may not be accessible for informal workers, or  in lower-resourced work settings, unless provided within  public health systems or through dedicated communitybased activities. There was no evidence available on the  differential benefits based on sociodemographic subgroups  (such as gender or race).  The GDG concluded that a conditional recommendation  for indicated psychosocial interventions – i.e. individual  psychosocial interventions delivered to workers with  emotional distress – was warranted. The overall certainty  of evidence was considered very low. Yet benefits on  mental health outcomes and work-related outcomes were  considered to outweigh the harms. On the basis of indirect  additional evidence, the GDG also concluded conditionally  to recommend leisure-based physical activity for the benefit  of reducing symptoms of emotional distress. Evidence was  available from Nigatu et al. (124) of two included trials that  investigated the treatment effects of supervised workplace  physical exercise – high-intensity aerobic exercise of at  least 20 minutes duration over 3 days, and strength-based  exercise that was group-delivered twice a week for 10 weeks  – where small and large effects were found on symptoms  of depression. The findings are in accordance with wider  literature on physical activity and reducing the severity  of mental health symptoms in adults with mental health  conditions (112, 125).

56 Guidelines on mental health at work

Recommendations for  returning to work after  absence associated with  mental health conditions © WHO / Lindsay Mackenzie

11 RECOMMENDATION 58 Guidelines on mental health at work For people on absence associated with mental health conditions, (a) workdirected care plus evidence-based mental health clinical care or (b) evidencebased mental health clinical care alone should be considered for the reduction of  mental health symptoms and reduction in days of absence.     Conditional recommendation, low certainty of evidence Key remarks: ▶ The evidence for this recommendation comes primarily from reviews on depression and  adjustment disorders. The WHO mhGAP guideline (2015) provides recommendations for  evidence-based clinical care in the general population in low-resourced settings. Implementation remarks: ▶ Multi-stakeholder coordination between the health provider, employer and worker, and worker  representatives or employment/vocational specialists, where feasible, may facilitate effective  implementation of return-to-work measures. The decision as to which stakeholders to include  and which interventions to participate in should be based on the worker’s preference.  ▶ Such coordination may present a feasibility challenge for many lower-resourced settings in LMICs  and globally for SMEs.  ▶ Work-directed care, clinical care and psychological interventions can be delivered face to face,  by telephone or online. Evidence-based clinical care, such as psychological interventions, can be  guided by a provider or can be unguided self-help, where resources are available.  ▶ Interventions may be delivered during the period of absence and/or as part of early re-entry to work. ▶ Interventions should not be mandated for completion as a prerequisite for re-entering work.  Manager Training for Mental Health Returning to work after absence associated with  mental health conditions

             59 Recommendations for returning to work after absence associated with mental health conditions Evidence and rationale Key question 11 investigated whether supporting people to  return to work, following absence associated with mental  health conditions, has a beneficial impact on outcomes  (Annex 3). Evidence was extracted from two systematic  reviews comparing return-to-work interventions for  workers with depression (127) or adjustment disorders  (128) (web Annex). Identified interventions could be broadly  categorized as: ▶ work-directed care (such as improving working  conditions, reducing working hours, changing of tasks  or a lighter load of tasks, graded reintroduction to work  etc., delivered or coordinated by various methods such  as multiple meetings with care providers, employer  and the worker- together or separately, depending on  the needs); ▶ evidence-based clinical care (such as evidence-based  psychological interventions);  ▶ improved health care (such as the introduction of care  management for depression in primary care); ▶ leisure-based physical activities (such as strengthtraining or aerobic exercises); or ▶ any combination of these, with comparators being care  as usual or any one of the intervention categories.  For work-directed interventions alone, compared to care as  usual, low-to-moderate certainty results were not favourable  for workers with depression with regard to mental health  outcomes (at medium [3–12 months] and long-term followup [12 months and over]), risk of being on absence, the  number of days on absence, and work functioning.  For work-directed care plus clinical care, compared with  care as usual for workers with depression, there was a low  certainty in small (medium-term follow-up) to moderate  (long-term follow-up) reductions in depressive symptoms.  There was a small effect in reducing the days on absence  at medium-term (moderate-certainty) and long-term  (low-certainty). However, there was moderate certainty  of no difference in the likelihood of being absent, versus  not being absent. There was very low to low certainty of  evidence for small effects on improving work functioning (at  medium term (not significant) and long term, respectively).  There was very low certainty that work-directed care plus  clinical intervention was no more superior (i.e. equally  comparable or beneficial) than work-directed care alone  or psychological interventions alone for mental health and  work-related outcomes. This anomaly (given the lack of  impact on outcomes of work-directed care alone) may be  accounted for by the heterogeneity of the interventions that  are included under “work-directed care”.  For evidence-based clinical interventions, outcomes were  available for workers with depression or with adjustment  disorders. Compared to care as usual in workers with  depression, low-certainty evidence indicated small  effects in reducing depression symptoms, and small  effects in reducing days on absence (at medium-term  follow-up). However, this was not observed at short-term  follow-up (up to 2 months). Multiple comparisons for  individual psychological interventions were available and  are described in web Annex with several psychological  interventions demonstrating positive effects on mental  health and work-related outcomes at short-, medium- or  long-term follow-up. 

60 Guidelines on mental health at work For improved healthcare, compared to care as usual for  workers with depression, moderate-certainty evidence  indicated small effects at medium-term follow-up on  depressive symptoms. However, there was moderate  certainty of a moderate effect on worsening work  functioning. No benefits in terms of absence days or the  likelihood of being absent were observed for improved  health care. Therefore, improved health care alone in the  absence of a work-focused intervention benefitted health  outcomes only but did not benefit functioning outcomes  specific to work. There were mixed results for leisurebased physical activities. For CBT combined with physical  relaxation, compared to physical relaxation alone, for  workers with adjustment disorders, low-certainty evidence  indicated that there were effects on burnout. For supervised  strength-training compared with relaxation for workers with  depression, there was low-certainty evidence of large effects  in favour of the benefit of strength-training on reduced  absence days.  Evidence-to-decision considerations Mental health conditions are considered to be a leading  cause of absence for workers (129, 130). Workers value the  availability of return-to-work programmes and sustainable  return-to-work, with the majority considering these to be  extremely important (web Annex: Values and preferences  survey). No direct examination of resource requirements  was available. Providers of work-directed care or evidencebased clinical care in the included reviews were specialists  in mental or occupational health, medical generalists, and  labour and employment specialists. Work-directed care  involved multiple meetings over variable periods of time  (e.g. nine meetings over a period of 3 months). For clinical  care, the number of sessions (e.g. 6–12) was dependent  on the structured intervention offered. Psychological  interventions can take place face to face, online or through  telephone support. A wide variety of potential stakeholders  are available to support the return to work. Ultimately  the coordination of stakeholders is needed (by workplace  or national health protocols) to ensure a smooth return  that respects the wishes of the worker and is in line with  available resources and coordination, depending on the  country’s capacity (131). For cost-effectiveness, additional evidence included an  economic analysis (126). Active involvement of occupational  health specialists in return to work was deemed as cost-saving  and cost-effective on the basis of the benefits of reducing  absence: in the Netherlands, a return of US$ 0.87 to US$ 10.63  for every US$ 1 invested (132, 133), and in Finland, a costsaving of US$ 17 to US$ 43 per avoided absence day (134).  For health equity, equality and discrimination, no  sociodemographic subgroup analyses (such as for gender  or race) were available. Feasibility of delivering returnto-work programmes for mental health may be especially  challenging for lower-resourced settings in LMICs and  globally for SMEs. All included studies (and additional  evidence) related to high-income countries across the  Americas, Asia, Europe and Oceania. Coordination between  the health sector, social care (labour/employment),  employers, workers and their representatives is needed to  support return-to-work measures. However, the current lack  of coordination in many contexts impedes implementation  (web Annex: Implementation review).  

             61 Recommendations for returning to work after absence associated with mental health conditions Supporting the right to participate in employment and  associated care for persons with, or recovering from, mental  health conditions, is in accordance with universal human  rights principles. Article 27 of the UNCRPD recognizes the  promotion of “vocational and professional rehabilitation, job  retention and return-to-work programmes for persons with  disabilities”. Application of UNCRPD and national disability  laws was noted as a necessary prerequisite to prevent fears  of seeking support for mental health in professions where  there is a concern that the licence to practise may be lost.  Sociocultural acceptability of return-to-work programmes  may be affected by similar fears of stigma or discrimination,  as revealed in Recommendation 3. Workers may have a  preference not to include their employers in discussions  with their health providers, and such preferences should be  prioritized by the persons responsible for coordinating the  return to work.  Overall, no data were available for quality of life,  substance use, suicidal behaviours, adverse effects or  positive mental health (web Annex). The GDG concluded  that, despite low certainty of evidence, the benefits on  mental health and work-related outcomes from workdirected interventions combined with clinical care, and  clinical care alone, outweighed the possible harms.  Work-directed interventions alone were not included in  the recommendation as there were no favourable effects  benefiting workers returning to work (when not delivered in  combination with evidence-based clinical care). Improved  health care was not specified in the recommendation due  to the moderate certainty in worsening work functioning.  Leisure-based physical activity was not recommended due  to uncertainty for its singular effect on key outcomes since  the control conditions included physical activity. 

62 Guidelines on mental health at work

Recommendations for  gaining employment  for people living  with mental health  conditions 

12 RECOMMENDATION 64 Guidelines on mental health at work Recovery-oriented strategies enhancing vocational and economic inclusion –  such as (augmented) supported employment – should be made available for  people with severe mental health conditions, including psychosocial disabilities,  to obtain and maintain employment.   Strong recommendation, low-certainty of evidence Key remarks: ▶ The majority of the evidence concerned people living with severe mental health conditions.  Implementation remarks: ▶ Multi-stakeholder coordination (person, family/community, workplace, representative) is  required to mobilize resources and strategies which enhance vocational and economic inclusion.  Involvement of these stakeholders and selection of the intervention should be based on the  prospective worker’s preferences.  ▶ It is important to include people with lived experience of mental health conditions in the design  and delivery of these programmes in order to optimize person-centred approaches and to  empower people in making decisions for their own well-being.  ▶ When people start their employment, support can continue, in order to support maintaining  employment.  ▶ Such strategies should be contextualized to people’s social and cultural environment, using  formal and non-formal recovery-oriented interventions that may be available.  Additional remarks: ▶ In 2015, the WHO mhGAP guideline recommended: Recovery-oriented strategies enhancing  vocational and economic inclusion (e.g. supported employment) can be offered for people  with psychosis (including schizophrenia and bipolar disorder). Such strategies should be  contextualized to their social and cultural environment, using formal and non-formal recoveryoriented interventions that may be available, and using a multisectoral approach (Conditional  recommendation, low certainty evidence).  Manager Training for Mental Health Gaining employment for people living with  mental health conditions

             65 Recommendations for gaining employment for people living with mental health conditions  Evidence and rationale Key question 12 investigated whether recovery-oriented  strategies focusing on vocational and economic inclusion  have a beneficial impact on outcomes (Annex 3). Evidence  was extracted from four systematic reviews, including  one network meta-analysis ([PHONE_REDACTED]. The interventions  were comparisons between supported employment  (e.g. programmes which support people to obtain paid  employment quickly, and ongoing health or vocational  support is provided to maintain employment); augmented  supported employment (e.g. supported employment with  the addition of interventions such as social skills training  or CBT); pre-vocational training (e.g. training is received  to up-skill prospective employees on social, emotional and  functioning skills before they are placed in employment);  transitional employment (e.g. stepped employment  programmes whereby people are first placed in temporary  work before next moving to employment); psychiatric  care (e.g. usual psychiatric care, without any vocational  component); supported employment versus other  vocational support (a mix of interventions such as prevocational training, job counselling); re-employment versus  care as usual and vocational interventions (the latter two  were majority-supported employment programmes which  focus on rapidly gaining paid and preferred employment,  while provided with support by vocational and healthcare systems) versus no care. Certainty of evidence varied  from very low to moderate, with the majority being of low  certainty (web Annex).  For obtaining employment, augmented supported  employment (moderate certainty) and supported  employment (low certainty) had higher relative effects  compared to psychiatric care and pre-vocational training.  Augmented supported employment and supported  employment were comparable in increasing the number of  people who obtained employment. Recipients of vocational  interventions compared to no care were more likely to  gain employment. There were no substantial benefits of  pre-vocational training or transitional employment on  obtaining employment.  For maintaining employment, augmented supported  employment was more effective compared to prevocational training and supported employment. Supported  employment was more effective than transitional  employment or pre-vocational training. Compared to other  vocational approaches, supported employment resulted  in more substantial increases in any levels of employment  obtained and in the length of job tenure.  For mental health outcomes, supported employment  had a more beneficial effect than psychiatric care but  was not superior in reducing mental health symptoms  compared to transitional employment or pre-vocational  training. Pre-vocational training was superior to  psychiatric care only in improving mental health  symptoms. No mental health outcomes were available for  augmented supported employment.

66 Guidelines on mental health at work For quality of life, augmented supported employment  resulted in better improvements in quality of life compared  to psychiatric care, but pre-vocational training was better  than augmented supported employment for improving  quality of life. Re-employment witnessed a small effect in  improving quality of life compared to care as usual. There  were no substantial impacts of supported employment  compared to pre-vocational training, transitional  employment or augmented supported employment;  however, supported employment had a more beneficial  effect on quality of life than psychiatric care alone.  For adverse effects (operationalized as drop-out), no  differences between the interventions which included  this outcome were observed (web Annex). Pre-vocational  training resulted in lower numbers of hospital admissions  compared to psychiatric care, but there were no other  differences in hospitalization between interventions. Evidence-to-decision considerations For values, most individuals living with severe mental  health conditions consistently report a desire to pursue  integrated, gainful employment. Strategies that enhance  vocational and economic inclusion support recovery by  targeting key recovery processes, as well as enhancing  social and economic inclusion in the community. However,  there are likely to be individual preferences for the different  intervention options available. Providers of mental health  prevention or care for workers, indicated vocational  support as the intervention for which they needed the  most information and training (web Annex: Values and  preferences survey). There was no direct examination of  resource requirements or cost-effectiveness. Augmented  and supported employment may be resource-intensive  approaches, which may not be feasible in low-income  settings since there is a need for available vocational and  mental health services to take an active role in delivering  these programmes.   For health equity, equality and discrimination, it was noted  that the majority of the evidence relates to severe mental  health conditions. For example, in one review  (135), the  majority of included diagnoses were psychotic disorders  and, in van Rijn (137) the majority were schizophrenia,  followed by affective disorders and major depression. Fadyl  (138) included studies with people living with mild-tomoderate mental health conditions, the majority of which  were depression and anxiety, and found positive effects of  vocational interventions on gaining employment. However,  retaining specification of the recommendation to severe 

             67 Recommendations for gaining employment for people living with mental health conditions  mental health conditions only, was decided because: 1)  it is in line with the majority of the evidence; and 2) the  GDG expressed concern that lower-income countries may  not feasibly be able to provide these programmes for the  volume of persons meeting criteria for more commonly  occurring mental health conditions. No other subgroup  analyses (such as by gender or race) were included.    Feasibility depends on the available infrastructure of  communities offering recovery-oriented strategies. For  instance, supported employment may depend on the wider  economic context or on the availability of a workforce  (labour or health) to deliver support.  Most included studies were performed in high-income  countries in Europe and North America and a minority were  conducted in an upper-middle-income country in Asia. An  intersectoral approach is required to mobilize resources  and strategies which enhance vocational and economic  inclusion. Involvement of the family and the community in  recovery-oriented psychosocial intervention programmes  can be important to their sustainability. Feasibility may also  be influenced by employers’ infrastructure for participating in  such programmes.    Supporting the right of persons living with psychosocial  disabilities to gain employment and stay in it is in line with  universal  human rights principles (e.g. Article 23 of the  Universal Declaration of Human Rights). Article 27 on Work  and Employment of the UNCRPD recognizes “the right of  persons with disabilities to work, on an equal basis with  others; this includes the right to the opportunity to gain a  living by work freely chosen or accepted in a labour market  and work environment that is open, inclusive and accessible  to persons with disabilities.”  Sociocultural acceptability  may be affected by employers not being aware of the option  of – or their potential role in – recovery-oriented strategies.  It may also be influenced by prospective colleagues or  supervisors who are not sensitized to the need to reduce  stigma regarding mental health at work. The GDG concluded that the benefits of recovery-oriented  strategies on enhancing vocational and economic inclusion  on obtaining and maintaining employment outweigh the  harms (of potential drop-out). While it would have been  preferable to indicate that the recommendation applies  across the spectrum of mental health conditions, most of  the evidence was in support of the benefits for people living  with severe mental health conditions. Both augmented  supported employment and supported employment  demonstrated particular promise on the key outcomes.  However, for mental health and quality-of-life-outcomes,  while benefits were observed, the results did not clearly  indicate superiority for any one intervention (i.e. where  reported, the interventions were equally comparable),  though it was noted that recovery-oriented strategies were  on the whole better than psychiatric care only with regard to  these outcomes.  

68 Guidelines on mental health at work

© WHO / Lindsay Mackenzie Screening  programmes

13 KEY QUESTION 70 Guidelines on mental health at work As it is unclear whether the potential benefits of screening programmes  outweigh potential harms, the GDG did not make a recommendation for or  against screening programmes during employment. Key remarks:	 ▶ This statement does not apply to screening which may be required by necessity of regulation  in some occupations, or screening when workers have been exposed to potential hazards to  (mental) health. Screening programmes

19 Evidence for pre-employment screening was not considered as it falls outside the scope of the guidelines.              71 Screening programmes Evidence and rationale Key question 13 investigated whether the use of screening  programmes – i.e. programmes that are designed to identify  workers with mental health problems and which are  then followed by providing them with, or directing them  towards, the necessary support during employment19 – were  beneficial (Annex 3). A systematic review of primary studies  was conducted. Thirteen studies were identified, with  seven eligible for GRADE, for screening programmes versus  screening followed by care as usual, wait list control or no  intervention (web Annex).   Low-certainty data indicated no impact of screening  programmes on reducing mental health symptoms or  improving positive mental health. Very low-certainty  data found small not significant improvements in work  functioning, positive effects on productivity at 5 months  which were not sustained at 12-month follow-up, and  no effects on job satisfaction. There was a negligible  improvement in absence which was not significant, although  there was evidence for a small positive effect, albeit of very  low certainty, at longer-term 5-year follow-up. One trial  indicated greater likelihood of absence and lower likelihood  of improvement in productivity for workers in receipt of  screening programmes. Small improvements from lowcertainty data suggested that screening programmes were  beneficial with regard to immediate help-seeking behaviours  but this was not sustained at follow-up assessments.  Adherence to the supports following positive screening was  low in one trial. No other direct harms were reported. The GDG concluded that there is a lack of clear evidence  that the desirable effects of screening programmes during  employment outweigh the undesirable effects (negligible  or mixed change in key outcomes such as mental health  symptoms and absence). Additional concerns were raised –  including confidentiality and the risk of the likelihoods of  false positives and false negatives when screening for mental  health symptoms – such that one-time-screening results,  if inaccurate and if misinterpreted, could lead to harms.  Reporting bias is also a concern in screening programmes  where workers are likely to under-report their symptoms  for fear of confidentiality breaches (139). On balance,  the GDG concluded that it was not possible to provide a  recommendation for or against screening programmes;  therefore no recommendation was made.    The GDG highlighted that the “no recommendation”  decision pertains to screening programmes conducted  during employment, rather than pre-employment screening.  The GDG noted that if screening takes place at work (e.g. by  necessity of regulations), then the screening programmes  should at least include:  	 ▶ ensured follow-up to access evidence-based  treatment or care for people who screen positive (see  Recommendations 3 and 10 for relevant interventions  for people with emotional distress); 	 ▶ involvement of qualified, professionally impartial  health providers to deliver and interpret screening  results and to manage referral to follow-up care; 	 ▶ ensured privacy and confidentiality; 	 ▶ adherence to human rights principles and ethical  considerations in order to prevent discriminatory  treatment of persons screening positive.  The Technical and ethical guidelines on workers  surveillance (140) and ILO Occupational Health Services  Recommendation No. [PHONE_REDACTED]provide additional nonbinding considerations for the surveillance of workers health  and indicate that, preferably, workers’ health surveillance  should be linked to the surveillance of occupational hazards  present in the workplace.  

72 Guidelines on mental health at work Evidence-to-decision considerations Improvement of mental health and work-related outcomes  is valued by all stakeholders. While two included studies  indicated that user satisfaction was positive, additional  data indicate that workers are concerned about stigma  and discrimination if they screen positive, as well as the  confidentiality of their data to employers. Indeed, the lowest  preference was given to screening programmes (web Annex:  Values and preferences survey). This is also reflected in wider  literature where such concerns generate under-reporting of  mental ill-health by workers, even if their symptoms would  indicate a need for further support (139).  Resource requirements for screening alone may be small  and limited to the mode of delivery (digital, paper) and to the  automation or not of the interpretation of results. Whereas  follow-up when screening positively will vary substantially  in resources pending options available (from self-help to  physician appointment). A cost-effectiveness analysis in one  included study from the Netherlands identified net benefits  of € 651 per staff member, or for every euro invested a return  of between € 5 and € 11 for employers.   For health equity, equality and discrimination, all identified  studies were conducted in medium-to-large workplaces in  high-income countries. No sociodemographic subgroup  analyses were identified. There remains a perception of a  considerable risk of discrimination against those screening  positive for mental health symptoms, including fears of  impact on employment status, career progression or other  work task opportunities. It was noted  that screening without effective follow-up can be harmful  (142). This may render the feasibility of large-scale screening  programmes unethical in many contexts since access to  quality mental health services remains limited. While  screening and identification of individuals in need of support/ care with the goal of reducing the burden of mental ill-health  is in accordance with universal human rights principles,  the screening of individuals at work elicits concerns about  privacy, confidentiality and informed consent. In this  situation, screening may appear to be involuntary and have  a risk of discrimination with few observable benefits on key  outcomes. The sociocultural acceptability of screening  programmes for mental health at work remains unclear. 

© WHO / Blink Media - Neil Nuia Research gaps  The GDG identified several gaps in the evidence included  within the scope of these guidelines.               [PHONE_REDACTED]Guidelines on mental health at work Overall research gaps ▶ Across all intervention types, there is a critical need, where applicable, to increase the volume and quality of evidence for effectiveness and feasibility in under-researched populations – i.e. the informal sector, SMEs and LMICs – and  for the selective at-risk workforce, such as international and national humanitarian workers, health workers not  responsible for direct clinical care (e.g. workers in health administration), community health workers and other  occupations at risk of negative mental health outcomes.  ▶ Across all intervention types, there is a need for sociodemographic subgroup analyses to determine whether there  are differential benefits or harms associated with intervention recipients’ sociodemographic (e.g. gender, age, race) or  occupational status (e.g. occupational sector, contract status (formal, informal, self-employed, size of workplace). This includes clear reporting of these characteristics under study or review, and clear reporting of the mental health status  of participants at baseline. ▶ Overall, there is a need for implementation research to study the acceptability, accessibility and uptake of interventions in order to better inform implementation guidance.  ▶ Overall, there is a need for quality investigation to study the effectiveness and feasibility of delivering preventive interventions which are combined at multiple levels of delivery (e.g. combinations of organizational, managers,  workers and individual interventions).  ▶ There is a need to increase the availability of high-quality research on organizational interventions (including policies), and their impact on mental health and work-related outcomes, regarding salient risk and protective factors at work  (which were not encountered by the evidence reviews of these guidelines) such as bullying, parental leave etc.  ▶ There is also a need to increase high-quality research in the cost-effectiveness of interventions for mental health  at work. 

             75 Research gaps Research gaps for organizational interventions Across organizational interventions  	 ▶ An increase is required in better-quality evidence – utilizing validated and culturally suitable measures of mental  health outcomes, psychosocial risks, and work-related outcomes – which assesses organizational interventions  that mitigate the known risk factors to workers’ mental health. This includes clear specification of the risk factors  addressed by the intervention, and designs which allow for establishing which components of the intervention  have had an impact on the outcomes. 	 ▶ Cluster-randomized designs, which include process evaluations, can be used to assess the effectiveness of  complex interventions in work settings, and the feasibility and acceptability to stakeholders. 	 ▶ The common components for effective implementation of organizational interventions need to be identified to  allow for better synthesis and comparison of research. 	 ▶ There is a need for an increase in better-quality investigation of emerging risk factors for the future of work and  how these can be mitigated. The evidence base should also be strengthened, taking account of ongoing changes  to the working environment for policy-making and implementation. For selective at-risk workers	 ▶ An increase is needed in better-quality studies which assess organizational interventions that mitigate the known  risk factors for the mental health of health, emergency and humanitarian workers. Studies should utilize validated  and culturally suitable measures of mental health outcomes, including disaggregation by sociodemographic  status, occupation and setting.	 ▶ More research is required on comparative effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of organizational interventions  compared to other intervention levels for health, emergency and humanitarian workers.  For workers with mental health conditions ▶ An increase is needed in better-quality studies which investigate the effectiveness, cost-effectiveness and  implementation of organizational interventions (such as reasonable accommodations) delivered to workers with  symptoms of emotional distress or meeting criteria for mental health conditions, in order to improve positive  mental health and reduce symptoms of mental health conditions, suicidal behaviours and substance use. While  there is a relatively better body of work in the field of return-to-work interventions, there remains a gap in  evidence for workplace accommodations for workers with mental health conditions – i.e. those who are in work  either following a return to work or never having taken absence due to a mental health condition. 	 ▶ Increased evidence on the factors for feasible, non-stigmatizing implementation of accommodations for workers  with mental health conditions. 

76 Guidelines on mental health at work Research priorities for manager training   Common to all manager training for mental health    ▶ Research on manager training for mental health should include measurement of supervisees’ work-related  outcomes such as absenteeism, presenteeism, productivity and performance.  ▶ Increase evidence of the effectiveness of manager training for mental health on priority outcomes (e.g. workers’  suicidal behaviours and substance use, managers’ leadership style).  ▶ Include a longer duration of follow-up (greater than 6 months) for key outcomes such as supervisees’ mental health. ▶ An increase in studies that identify effective components of manager training for mental health, including delivery  components (e.g. duration) and content components.  ▶ An increase in better-quality studies and/or trials of leadership-oriented manager training and its impact on  health outcomes.  ▶ An increase in better-quality studies on interventions that address help-seeking outcomes effectively (e.g. by  mitigating stigma in the workplace). For selective at-risk sectors  ▶ More studies to investigate the effectiveness and feasibility of manager training for mental health in health,  emergency and humanitarian work settings.  Research priorities for worker training  Common across workers’ training   ▶ An increase in better-quality evidence for mental health literacy and awareness training and its effects on provision  of help to colleagues in distress and on increasing help-seeking behaviours (including for the prevention of suicide). ▶ An increase in studies which identify effective components of workers’ training for mental health, including  delivery components (e.g. duration) and content components.  For selective at-risk workers ▶ An increase in higher-quality and sufficiently powered research to determine the effectiveness of training health,  humanitarian and emergency personnel in knowledge, attitudes and skills for mental health.  ▶ An increase in evidence which identifies medium- to long-term follow-up duration effects to inform decisions as to  how frequently training should be delivered. 

             77 Research gaps Research gaps for individual interventions   Common across individual interventions     ▶ An increase in better-quality studies which ascertain the incidence of workers meeting the criteria for mental  health diagnosis through use of diagnostic assessments at baseline and follow-up to determine the extent of  prevention of mental ill-health. ▶ An increase in better-quality studies which assess the comparative efficacy and cost-effectiveness of specific  individual interventions, which include medium- to long-term follow-up to assess sustainability of effects. ▶ An increase in better-quality studies which include validated work-related outcomes when assessing the effects of  individual interventions, including longer-term durations of follow-up.  ▶ An increase in studies which identify effective components of (work-focused) psychosocial interventions for  mental health and work-related outcomes, such as delivery components (e.g. duration) and content components  (e.g. mode of psychosocial intervention). ▶ An increase in studies of individual interventions which include suicidal behaviours and substance use outcomes.  ▶ Increased use of cluster randomized controlled designs in this field. ▶ An increase in effectiveness and implementation research which delineates additive or comparative effects  of multimodal programmes (e.g. combining individual and organizational interventions) compared to singleintervention types (e.g. individual interventions alone).  Research gaps for absence due to mental health conditions    ▶ An increase in better-quality studies which focus on sustainable return to work (e.g. by increasing the duration of  follow-up to a minimum of 12 months). ▶ Greater inclusion of outcomes that indicate the benefit of the intervention – such as duration of time returned to  work, duration of time from partial return to work until full return to work, productivity and ability to work (rather  than only outcomes on reduction in absence days due to mental health conditions).  ▶ An increase in studies that investigate cost-effectiveness of the intervention options for return to work following  absence due to mental health conditions. ▶ An increase in better-quality research to assess which combination of work-directed and clinical interventions are  most effective and feasible. 

78 Guidelines on mental health at work Research gaps for gaining employment for people living with mental  health conditions  ▶ An increase in studies which investigate the effectiveness of recovery-oriented strategies that enhance vocational  and economic inclusion and that consistently include outcomes on recovery for mental health conditions and  work-related outcomes of interest to employers. ▶ An increase in better-quality studies which investigate the cost-effectiveness of options for recovery-oriented  strategies that enhance vocational and economic inclusion. ▶ An increase in studies which investigate the effectiveness and feasibility of implementing recovery-oriented  strategies for people living with mild-to-moderate mental health conditions. Research gaps for screening programmes ▶ In order to be able to make a recommendation, high-quality and sufficiently powered research is needed to  evaluate the benefits and harms of screening programmes at work and their efficacy in reducing the symptoms of  mental health conditions.

Dissemination  and update of the  guidelines © WHO / Blink Media - Gareth Bentley              [PHONE_REDACTED]Guidelines on mental health at work Dissemination  The guidelines are available on the WHO website in English, with the executive summary available in all six United Nations  languages. National ministries responsible for mental health and occupational health will be notified of the guidelines  through WHO’s regional and country offices. Ministries for labour and employment, and representative bodies for workers  and employers, will be notified of the guidelines through the ILO. The guidelines will be shared with a broad network of  international partners, including representative organizations for persons responsible for or committed to the health,  safety and well-being of workers, as well as WHO collaborating centres, universities, nongovernmental organizations and  UN agencies.  Implementation To facilitate implementation of the recommendations, a policy brief will accompany the guidelines, developed jointly by  WHO and ILO. The policy brief will be made available in the six United Nations languages to facilitate wide dissemination  and will present policy and implementation options which will be derived from the guidelines. WHO regional and country  offices will encourage implementation at country level. The implementation may also be supported locally through the  adoption and implementation of the WHO Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan (2013–2030) and the WHO global  strategy for health, environment and climate change, both of which have been adopted by the World Health Assembly.  Additionally, WHO will disseminate the guidelines and the joint policy brief through a broad network of international  partners, including national ministries of health, WHO collaborating centres, key stakeholder groups (which represent the  target audience of these guidelines), universities, nongovernmental organizations and United Nations agencies. The ILO will  promote the dissemination of the policy brief among its tripartite constituents, including ministries of labour, in addition to  employer and worker organizations. This will provide policy guidance on the roles and responsibilities of actors in the world  of work in preventing, protecting and promoting, and supporting mental health at work.

20 See: https://www.mindbank.info (accessed 29 May 2022).              81 Dissemination and update of the guidelines Monitoring and evaluation of the uptake and implementation  of the guidelines WHO will seek to monitor uptake and implementation of the guidelines in national policies and programmes by reviewing  the number of countries that have adapted or endorsed the guidelines. WHO will use the WHO atlas [17] and other routine  approaches (e.g. the WHO MiNDbank database20) to assess how national policies and service delivery for workers have been  adapted to integrate the recommendations. WHO will seek to continue to collect regular feedback from implementation  activities and key stakeholders in order to evaluate the usefulness and impact of the guidelines.  Future updating of the guidelines   The guidelines are expected to be valid for a period of five years. The WHO Secretariat, in consultation with technical experts, will  continue to follow research development in mental health promotion, prevention and interventions for workers – particularly  for questions in which the certainty of evidence was found to be of low or very low certainty. If new evidence emerges or other  important considerations arise which may have an impact on the current recommendations, WHO will coordinate an update of the  guidelines, following the procedures outlined in the WHO handbook for guideline development, second edition [26]. 

References 1.	 Suicide worldwide in 2019: Global health estimates.  Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021 (https:// apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/341728, accessed 26  August 2022). 2.	 Chisholm D, Sweeny K, Sheehan P, Rasmussen B, Smit  F, Cuijpers P et al. Scaling-up treatment of depression  and anxiety: a global return on investment analysis.  Lancet Psychiatry. 2016;3(5):415–24. 3.	 Psychosocial factors at work: recognition and  control. Report of the Joint ILO/WHO Committee  on Occupational Health, ninth session, Geneva,  18–24 September 1984. Geneva: International Labour  Organization; 1986. 4.	 The effects of non-standard forms of employment on  worker health and safety. Geneva: International Labour  Organization; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/ groups/public/---ed_protect/---protrav/---travail/ documents/publication/wcms_443266.pdf, accessed 26  August 2022). 5.	 Violence and Harassment Convention, 2019 (No. 190).  Geneva: International Labour Organization; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXP UB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C190, accessed 26  August 2022).  6.	 León-Pérez JM, Escartín J, Giorgi G. The presence of  workplace bullying and harassment worldwide. In:  D’Cruz P, Noronha E, Notelaers G, Rayner C, editors.  Concepts, approaches and methods. Handbooks of  workplace bullying: emotional abuse and harassment,  volume 1. Singapore: Springer; 2021: 55–86. 7.	 Toth KE, Yvon F, Villotti P, Lecomte T, Lachance J-P,  Kirsh B et al. Disclosure dilemmas: how people with  a mental health condition perceive and manage  disclosure at work. Disabil Rehab. 2021;11:1–11. 8.	 Women and men in the informal economy: a statistical  picture. Geneva: International Labour Organization;  2018 (https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/- --dgreports/---dcomm/documents/publication/ wcms_626831.pdf, accessed 26 August 2022).  9.	 López-Ruiz M, Artazcoz L, Martínez JM, Rojas M,  Benavides FG. Informal employment and health status  in Central America. BMC Public Health. 2015;15:698. 10.	 Ludermir AB, Lewis G. Informal work and common  mental disorders. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol.  2003;38(9):485–9. 11.	 Makhubele M, Ravhuhali K, Kuonza L, Mathee  A, Kgalamono S, Made F et al. Common mental  health disorders among informal waste pickers in  Johannesburg, South Africa 2018 – a cross-sectional  study. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019;16(14):2618. 12.	 Working time and the future of work. Geneva:  International Labour Organization; 2018 (https:// labordoc.ilo.org/discovery/delivery/41ILO_INST:41ILO_ V1/[PHONE_REDACTED], accessed 26 August 2022).  13.	 Healthy and safe telework: technical brief. Geneva:  World Health Organization and International Labour Organization; 2021 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ bitstream/handle/10665/341505/[PHONE_REDACTED]eng.pdf?sequence=2&isAllowed=y, accessed 26  August 2022).  14.	 Cox T, Griffiths A. The nature and measurement of  work-related stress: theory and practice. In: Wilson JR,  Corlett N, editors. Evaluation of human work. London:  CRS Press; 2005. 15.	 Workplace stress – a collective challenge. Geneva:  International Labour Organization; 2016 (https:// www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_protect/- --protrav/---safework/documents/publication/ wcms_466547.pdf, accessed 26 August 2022). 16.	 Occupational Safety and Health Convention,  1981 (No.155) and Recommendation (No.164).  Geneva: International Labour Organization;  1981 (https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/ f?p=NORMLEXPUB:55:0::NO::P55_TYPE,P55_LANG,P55_ DOCUMENT,P55_NODE:REC,en,R164,/Document,  accessed 26 August 2022). 17.	 Mental health atlas 2020. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2021 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/345946, accessed 26 August 2022). 82 Guidelines on mental health at work

18.	 Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030.  Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021 (https://apps.who. int/iris/handle/10665/345301, accessed 26 August 2022). 19.	 WHO global strategy on health, environment and  climate change: the transformation needed to improve  lives and wellbeing sustainably through healthy  environments. Geneva: World Health Organization;  2020 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/331959,  accessed 26 August 2022).  20.	 Occupational health and safety management –  psychological health and safety at work – guidelines  for managing psychosocial risks. Geneva: International  Organization for Standardization; 2021. 21.	 Labor force participation rate, total (% of total  population ages 15+) (modeled ILO estimate).  Washington (DC): The World Bank (https://data. worldbank.org/indicator/SL.TLF.CACT.ZS, accessed 27  May 2022). 22.	 The mhGAP community toolkit: field test version.  Geneva: World Health Organization, 2019 (https:// apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/328742, accessed 26  August 2022).  23.	 Petrie K, Milligan-Saville J, Gayed A, Deady M, Phelps  A, Dell L et al. Prevalence of PTSD and common mental  disorders amongst ambulance personnel: a systematic  review and meta-analysis. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr  Epidemiol. 2018;53(9):897–909. 24.	 Strohmeier H, Scholte WF. Trauma-related mental  health problems among national humanitarian  staff: a systematic review of the literature. Eur J  Psychotraumatol. 2015;6:28541. 25.	 WHO handbook for guideline development. Geneva:  World Health Organization; 2014 (https://apps.who.int/ iris/handle/10665/145714, accessed 26 August 2022).  26.	 WHO handbook for guideline development. Geneva:  World Health Organization; 2014. 27.	 Kröll C, Doebler P, Nüesch S. Meta-analytic evidence of  the effectiveness of stress management at work. Eur J  Work Organ Psychol. 2017;26(5):677–93. 28.	 Daniels K, Gedikli C, Watson D, Semkina A, Vaughn O.  Job design, employment practices and well-being: a  systematic review of intervention studies. Ergonomics.  2017;60(9):1177–96. 29.	 Verbeek J, Ruotsalainen J, Laitinen J, Korkiakangas  E, Lusa S, Mänttäri S et al. Interventions to enhance  recovery in healthy workers; a scoping review. Occup  Med (Lond). 2019;69(1):54–63. 30.	 Shrestha N, Kukkonen‐Harjula K T, Verbeek J H, Ijaz  S, Hermans V, Pedisic Z. Workplace interventions for  reducing sitting at work. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.  2018;(6):CD010912. 31.	 Naghieh A, Montgomery P, Bonell CP, Thompson M,  Aber JL. Organisational interventions for improving  wellbeing and reducing work‐related stress in teachers.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;(4):CD010306. 32.	 Joyce K, Pabayo R, Critchley JA, Bambra C. Flexible  working conditions and their effects on employee  health and wellbeing. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.  2010;(2):CD008009. 33.	 Lau RWM, Mak WH. Effectiveness of workplace  interventions for depression in Asia: a meta-analysis.  SAGE Open. 2017;(7)2. doi:10.1177/[PHONE_REDACTED]. 34.	 Mlekus L, Maier GW. More hype than substance? A  meta-analysis on job and task rotation. Front Psychol.  2021;12:633530. 35.	 Aronsson G, Theorell T, Grape T, Hammarström A,  Hogstedt C, Marteinsdottir I et al. A systematic review  including meta-analysis of work environment and  burnout symptoms. BMC Public Health. 2017;17(1):1–13. 36.	 van der Molen HF, Nieuwenhuijsen K, Frings-Dresen  MH, de Groene G. Work-related psychosocial risk  factors for stress-related mental disorders: an updated  systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ Open.  2020;10(7):e034849. 37.	 Rugulies R, Sørensen K, Di Tecco C, Bonafede M,  Rondinone BM, Ahn S et al. The effect of exposure to  long working hours on depression: a systematic review  and meta-analysis from the WHO/ILO Joint Estimates of  the Work-related Burden of Disease and Injury. Environ  Int. 2021;155:106629. 38.	 Virtanen M, Jokela M, Madsen IE, Hanson LLM, Lallukka  T, Nyberg ST et al. Long working hours and depressive  symptoms: systematic review and meta-analysis  of published studies and unpublished individual  participant data. Scand J Work Environ Health.  2018;44(3):239–50.              83 References

39.	 Virtanen M, Jokela M, Nyberg ST, Madsen IE, Lallukka  T, Ahola K et al. Long working hours and alcohol use:  systematic review and meta-analysis of published  studies and unpublished individual participant data.  BMJ. 2015;350:g7772. 40.	 Richter K, Peter L, Rodenbeck A, Weess HG, RiedelHeller SG, Hillemacher T. Shiftwork and alcohol  consumption: a systematic review of the literature. Eur  Addict Res. 2021;27(1):9–15. 41.	 Milner A, Witt K, LaMontagne AD, Niedhammer I.  Psychosocial job stressors and suicidality: a metaanalysis and systematic review. Occup Environ Med.  2018;75(4):245–53. 42.	 Theorell T, Hammarström A, Aronsson G, Bendz LT,  Grape T, Hogstedt C et al. A systematic review including  meta-analysis of work environment and depressive  symptoms. BMC Public Health. 2015;15(1):1–14. 43.	 Duchaine CS, Aubé K, Gilbert-Ouimet M, Vézina M,  Ndjaboué R, Massamba V et al. Psychosocial stressors  at work and the risk of sickness absence due to a  diagnosed mental disorder: a systematic review and  meta-analysis. JAMA Psychiatry. 2020;77(8):842–51. 44.	 Madsen IE, Nyberg ST, Hanson LM, Ferrie JE, Ahola K,  Alfredsson L et al. Job strain as a risk factor for clinical  depression: systematic review and meta-analysis with  additional individual participant data. Psychol Med.  2017;47(8):1342–56. 45.	 Verkuil B, Atasayi S, Molendijk ML. Workplace bullying  and mental health: a meta-analysis on cross-sectional  and longitudinal data. PLoS One. 2015;10(8):e[PHONE_REDACTED]. 46.	 Rudkjoebing LA, Bungum AB, Flachs EM, Eller NH,  Borritz M, Aust B et al. Work-related exposure to  violence or threats and risk of mental disorders and  symptoms: a systematic review and meta-analysis.  Scand J Work Environ Health. 2020;46(4):339–49. 47.	 Schmidt S, Roesler U, Kusserow T, Rau R. Uncertainty  in the workplace: examining role ambiguity and role  conflict, and their link to depression – a meta-analysis.  Eur J Work Organ Psychol. 2014;23(1):91–106. 48.	 Kim TJ, von dem Knesebeck O. Perceived job insecurity,  unemployment and depressive symptoms: a systematic  review and meta-analysis of prospective observational  studies. Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 2016;89(4):561–73.								 49. Milner A, Scovelle AJ, King TL, Madsen I. Exposure to  work stress and use of psychotropic medications: a  systematic review and meta-analysis. J Epidemiol  Community Health. 2019;73(6):569–76. 50. Rugulies R, Aust B, Madsen IE. Effort-reward imbalance  at work and risk of depressive disorders. A systematic  review and meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies.  Scand J Work Environ Health. 2017.43(4):294–306. 51. Yoshimura K, Kawakami N, Tsusumi A, Inoue A,  Kobayashi Y, Takeuchi A et al. Cost-benefit analysis of  primary prevention programs for mental health at the  workplace in Japan. Sangyo Eiseigaku Zasshi.  2013;55(1):11–24. 52. Working conditions in a global perspective. Brussels  and Geneva: Publications Office of the European Union  and International Labour Organization; 2019 (https:// www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/--- dcomm/---publ/documents/publication/wcms_696174.  pdf, accessed 26 August 2022). 53. Houtman I, Jettinghof K, Cedillo L, & World Health  Organization. Occupational and Environmental  Health Team. Raising awareness of stress at work in  developing countries: advice to employers and worker  representatives. Geneva: World Health Organization; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/42956, accessed  26 August 2022).  54. International minimum requirements for health  protection in the workplace. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2017 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/259674, accessed 26 August 2022).  55. Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 10 December  1948. United Nations General Assembly Resolution 217  A(III). New York (NY): United Nations; 1948 (https:// www.un.org/en/about-us/universal-declaration-ofhuman-rights, accessed 26 August 2022).  56. Occupational Safety and Health Convention, [PHONE_REDACTED]No.155). Geneva: International Labour Organization; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:  12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C155, accessed 26 August  2022).

84 Guidelines on mental health at work

57.	 WHO global strategy on health, environment and  climate change: the transformation needed to improve  lives and wellbeing sustainably through healthy  environments. Geneva: World Health Organization;  2020 (https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/hand le/10665/331959/[PHONE_REDACTED]eng.pdf?ua=1,  accessed 26 August 2022).  58.	 McCulloch P, Rathbone J, Catchpole K. Interventions  to improve teamwork and communications among  healthcare staff. Br J Surg. 2011;98(4):469–79. 59.	 Romppanen J, Häggman‐Laitila A. Interventions for  nurses’ well‐being at work: a quantitative systematic  review. J Adv Nurs. 2017;73(7):1555–69. 60.	 Sakuraya A, Imamura K, Watanabe K, Asai Y, Ando E,  Eguchi H et al. What kind of intervention is effective  for improving subjective well-being among workers?  A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized  controlled trials. Front Psychol. 2020;11:528656. 61.	 Panagioti M, Panagopoulou E, Bower P, Lewith G,  Kontopantelis E, Chew-Graham C et al. Controlled  interventions to reduce burnout in physicians: a  systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med.  2017;177(2):195–205. 62.	 Global strategy on human resources for health: workforce 2030. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2016 (https:// apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/250368, accessed 26  August 2022).  63.	 ILO guidelines on decent work in public emergency  services. Geneva: International Labour Organization;  2018 (https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/--- ed_dialogue/---sector/documents/normativeinstrument/ wcms_626551.pdf, accessed 26 August 2022).  64.	 Alhassan RK, Nketiah-Amponsah E, Spieker N, Kojo  Arhinful D, Rinke de Wit TF. Assessing the impact of  community engagement interventions on health  worker motivation and experiences with clients in  primary health facilities in Ghana: a randomized cluster  trial. PLoS One. 2016;11(7):e[PHONE_REDACTED]. 65.	 Strohmeier H, Scholte WF, Ager A. How to improve  organisational staff support? Suggestions from  humanitarian workers in South Sudan. Intervention.  2019;17(1):40–9.

66.	 Occupational Health Services Convention (No.161).  Seventy-first International Labour Conference.  Geneva: International Labour Organization;  1985 (https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/ f?p=NORMLEXPUB:55:0:::55:P55_TYPE,P55_LANG,P55_ DOCUMENT,P55_NODE:CON,en,C161,/Document,  accessed 26 August 2022). 67.	 Zafar N, Rotenberg M, Rudnick A. A systematic review  of work accommodations for people with mental  disorders. Work. 2019;64(3):461–75. 68.	 Bolo C, Sareen J, Patten S, Schmitz N, Currie S, Wang J.  Receiving workplace mental health accommodations  and the outcome of mental disorders in employees  with a depressive and/or anxiety disorder. J Occup  Environ Med. 2013;55(11):1293–99. 69.	 Secker J, Membrey H, Grove B, Seebohm P. The how  and why of workplace adjustments: contextualizing the  evidence. Psychiatr Rehabil J. 2003;27(1):3. 70.	 Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities  (CRPD). United Nations General Assembly Resolution  A/ RES/61/106. New York (NY): United Nations; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/ convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities/ convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-withdisabilities-2.html, accessed 26 August 2022).  71.	 Chow CM, Cichocki B. Predictors of job  accommodations for individuals with psychiatric  disabilities. Rehabil Couns Bull. 2016;59(3):172–84. 72.	 Granger B, Baron R, Robinson S. Findings from a  national survey of job coaches and job developers  about job accommodations arranged between  employers and people with psychiatric disabilities. J  Vocat Rehabil. 1997;9(3):235–51. 73.	 Chow CM, Cichocki B, Croft B. The impact of job  accommodations on employment outcomes among  individuals with psychiatric disabilities. Psychiatr Serv.  2014;65(9):1126–32. 74.	 Wang J, Patten S, Currie S, Sareen J, Schmitz  N. Perceived needs for and use of workplace  accommodations by individuals with a depressive  and/or anxiety disorder. J Occup Environ Med.  2011;53(11):1268–72.

             85 References

75.	 Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment (Disabled  Persons) Convention (No. 159). Geneva: International  Labour Organization;1983 (https://www.ilo.org/dyn/ normlex/fr/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:55:0::NO::P55_TYPE,P55_ LANG,P55_DOCUMENT,P55_NODE:CON,en,C159,/ Document, accessed 26 August 2022).  76.	 Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment (Disabled  Persons) Recommendation (No. 168). Geneva:  International Labour Organization; 1983 (https://www. ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO ::P12100_ILO_CODE:R168, accessed 26 August 2022).  77.	 Gayed A, Milligan-Saville JS, Nicholas J, Bryan BT,  LaMontagne AD, Milner A et al. Effectiveness of training  workplace managers to understand and support the  mental health needs of employees: a systematic review  and meta-analysis. Occup Environ Med. 2018;75(6):462–70. 78.	 Kuehnl A, Seubert C, Rehfuess E, von Elm E, Nowak  D, Glaser J. Human resource management training  of supervisors for improving health and well‐ being of employees. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.  2019;(9):CD010905. 79.	 Dimoff JK, Kelloway EK. With a little help from my boss:  the impact of workplace mental health training on  leader behaviors and employee resource utilization. J  Occup Health Psychol. 2019;24(1):4. 80.	 Workplace health: management practices. NICE  Guideline [NG13]. London: National Institute for Health  and Care Excellence; 2016. 81.	 Dawkins S, Martin A, Kilpatrick M, Scott J. Reasons for  engagement: SME owner-manager motivations for  engaging in a workplace mental health and wellbeing  intervention. J Occup Environ Med. 2018;60(10):917–27. 82.	 Tsutsumi A. Development of an evidence-based  guideline for supervisor training in promoting mental  health: literature review. J Occup Health. 2011;53(1):1–9. 83.	 Evans-Lacko S, Brohan E, Mojtabai R, Thornicroft G.  Association between public views of mental illness and  self-stigma among individuals with mental illness in 14  European countries. Psychol Med. 2012;42(8):1741–52. 84.	 Stuber F, Seifried-Dübon T, Rieger MA, Gündel H, Ruhle  S, Zipfel S et al. The effectiveness of health-oriented  leadership interventions for the improvement of mental  health of employees in the health care sector: a systematic  review. Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 2021;94(2):203–20. 85.	 Milligan-Saville JS, Tan L, Gayed A, Barnes C, Madan I,  Dobson M et al. Workplace mental health training for  managers and its effect on sick leave in employees: a  cluster randomised controlled trial. Lancet Psychiatry.  2017;4(11):850–8. 86.	 Akhanemhe R, Wallbank S, Greenberg N. An evaluation  of REACTMH mental health training for healthcare  supervisors. Occup Med (Lond). 2021;71(3):127–30. 87.	 Delivered by women, led by men: a gender and equity  analysis of the global health and social workforce.  Geneva: World Health Organization; 2019 (https:// apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/311322, accessed 26  August 2022).  88.	 Hanisch SE, Twomey CD, Szeto AC, Birner UW, Nowak  D, Sabariego C. The effectiveness of interventions  targeting the stigma of mental illness at the workplace:  a systematic review. BMC Psychiatry. 2016;16(1):1–11. 89.	 Milner A, Page K, Spencer-Thomas S, LaMontagne AD.  Workplace suicide prevention: a systematic review of  published and unpublished activities. Health Promot  Int. 2014;30(1):29–37. 90.	 Morgan AJ, Ross A, Reavley NJ. Systematic review and  meta-analysis of mental health First Aid training: effects  on knowledge, stigma, and helping behaviour. PLoS  One. 2018;13(5):e[PHONE_REDACTED]. 91.	 Forthal S, Sadowska K, Pike KM, Balachander M, Jacobsson K, Hermosilla S. Mental health first aid: a systematic review  of trainee behavior and recipient mental health outcomes.  Psychiatr Serv. 2021;appi. ps. [PHONE_REDACTED]. 92.	 Lu S, Li W, Oldenburg B, Wang Y, Jorm AF, He Y et al.  Cultural adaptation of the mental health first aid  guidelines for depression used in English-speaking  countries for China: a Delphi expert consensus study.  BMC Psychiatry. 2020;20(1):1–12. 93.	 Moll SE, Patten S, Stuart H, MacDermid JC, Kirsh B.  Beyond silence: a randomized, parallel-group trial  exploring the impact of workplace mental health  literacy training with healthcare employees. Canadian J  Psych. 2018;63(12):826–33. 94.	 Tan L, Harvey SB, Deady M, Dobson M, Donohoe A, Suk C et al. Workplace mental health awareness training:  a cluster randomized controlled trial. J Occup Environ  Med. 2021;63(4):311–6. 86 Guidelines on mental health at work

95.	 Krameddine Y, DeMarco D, Hassel R, Silverstone PH. A  novel training program for police officers that improves  interactions with mentally ill individuals and is costeffective. Front Psychiatry. 2013;4:9. 96.	 Brooks SK, Dunn R, Amlôt R, Greenberg N, Rubin  GJ. Training and post-disaster interventions for the  psychological impacts on disaster-exposed employees:  a systematic review. J Ment Health. 2018;15:1–25. 97.	 Caulfield A, Vatansever D, Lambert G, Van Bortel T. WHO  guidance on mental health training: a systematic review  of the progress for non-specialist health workers. BMJ  Open. 2019;9(1):e024059. 98.	 Knaak S, Mantler E, Szeto A. Mental illness-related  stigma in healthcare: barriers to access and care and  evidence-based solutions. Healthc Manage Forum.  2017;30(2):111–16. 99.	 Anderson GS, Di Nota PM, Groll D, Carleton RN. Peer  support and crisis-focused psychological interventions  designed to mitigate post-traumatic stress injuries  among public safety and frontline healthcare  personnel: a systematic review. Int J Environ Res Public  Health. 2020;17(20):7645. 100.	 Maricuţoiu LP, Sava FA, Butta O. The effectiveness of  controlled interventions on employees’ burnout: a  meta‐analysis. J Occup Organ Psychol. 2016;89(1):1–27. 101.	 Vega-Escaño J, Porcel-Gálvez AM, de Diego-Cordero R,  Romero-Sánchez JM, Romero-Saldaña M, BarrientosTrigo S. Insomnia interventions in the workplace: a  systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Environ Res  Public Health. 2020;17(17):6401. 102.	 Slemp GR, Jach HK, Chia A, Loton DJ, Kern ML.  Contemplative interventions and employee distress: a  meta‐analysis. Stress Health. 2019;35(3):227–55. 103.	 Stratton E, Lampit A, Choi I, Calvo RA, Harvey SB,  Glozier N. Effectiveness of eHealth interventions for  reducing mental health conditions in employees:  a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One.  2017;12(12):e[PHONE_REDACTED]. 104.	 Carolan S, Harris PR, Cavanagh K. Improving employee  well-being and effectiveness: systematic review  and meta-analysis of web-based psychological  interventions delivered in the workplace. J Med  Internet Res. 2017;19(7):e271. 105.	 Phillips EA, Gordeev VS, Schreyögg J. Effectiveness  of occupational e-mental health interventions: a  systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized  controlled trials. Scand J Work Environ Health.  2019;45(6):560–76. 106.	Oakman J, Neupane S, Proper KI, Kinsman N, Nygård C-H. Workplace interventions to improve work  ability: a systematic review and meta-analysis of their  effectiveness. Scand J Work Environ Health. 2018;134–46. 107.	 Cuijpers P, Miguel C, Ciharova M, Aalten P, Batelaan N,  Salemink E et al. Prevention and treatment of mental health and psychosocial problems in college students: an umbrella  review of meta-analyses. Clin Psychol. 2021;28(3):229. 108.	 Commissioning cost-effective services for promotion of  mental health and wellbeing and prevention of mental  ill-health. London: Public Health England; 2017 (https:// www.lse.ac.uk/business/consulting/assets/documents/ commissioning-cost-effective-services-for-promotionof-mental-health-and-wellbeing-and-prevention-ofmental-ill-health.pdf, accessed 26 August 2022). 109.	 Baxter S, Sanderson K, Venn AJ, Blizzard CL, Palmer  AJ. The relationship between return on investment  and quality of study methodology in workplace  health promotion programs. Am J Health Promot.  2014;28(6):347–63. 110.	Hamdani SU, Rahman A, Wang D, Chen T, van Ommeren  M, Chisholm D et al. Cost-effectiveness of WHO problem  management plus for adults with mood and anxiety  disorders in a post-conflict area of Pakistan: randomised controlled trial. Br J Psychiatry. 2020;217(5):623–9. 111.	 Martin A, Kilpatrick M, Scott J, Cocker F, Dawkins S, Brough P et al. Protecting the mental health of small-to-medium  enterprise owners: a randomized control trial evaluating  a self-administered versus telephone supported  intervention. J Occup Environ Med. 2020;62(7):503. 112.	 WHO guidelines on physical activity and sedentary  behaviour. Geneva: World Health Organization; [PHONE_REDACTED]https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/336656,  accessed 26 August 2022).  113.	 Guidelines for the management of conditions  specifically related to stress. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2013 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ bitstream/handle/10665/85119/[PHONE_REDACTED]_eng. pdf, accessed 26 August 2022).               87 References

114.	 Melnyk BM, Kelly SA, Stephens J, Dhakal K, McGovern C,  Tucker S et al. Interventions to improve mental health,  well-being, physical health, and lifestyle behaviors  in physicians and nurses: a systematic review. Am J  Health Promot. 2020;34(8):929–41. 115.	 Kunzler AM, Helmreich I, Chmitorz A, König J, Binder  H, Wessa M et al. Psychological interventions to foster  resilience in healthcare professionals. Cochrane  Database Syst Rev. 2020;(7):CD012527. 116.	 Petrie K, Crawford J, Baker ST, Dean K, Robinson J,  Veness BG et al. Interventions to reduce symptoms  of common mental disorders and suicidal ideation in  physicians: a systematic review and meta-analysis.  Lancet Psychiatry. 2019;6(3):225–34. 117.	 West CP, Dyrbye LN, Erwin PJ, Shanafelt TD.  Interventions to prevent and reduce physician burnout:  a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet.  2016;[PHONE_REDACTED]:2272–81. 118.	 Fendel JC, Bürkle JJ, Göritz AS. Mindfulness-based  interventions to reduce burnout and stress in  physicians: a systematic review and meta-analysis.  Acad Med. 2020;96(5):751–64. 119.	 Guillaumie L, Boiral O, Champagne J. A mixed‐methods  systematic review of the effects of mindfulness on  nurses. J Adv Nurs. 2017;73(5):1017–34. 120.	 Wasson RS, Barratt C, O’Brien WH. Effects of  mindfulness-based interventions on self-compassion in  health care professionals: a meta-analysis. Mindfulness.  2020;11(8):1914–34. 121.	 Haugen PT, McCrillis AM, Smid GE, Nijdam MJ. Mental  health stigma and barriers to mental health care for  first responders: a systematic review and meta-analysis.  J Psychiatr Res. 2017;94:218–29. 122.	 Alden L, Matthews L, Wagner S, Fyfe T, Randall C, Regehr C et  al. Systematic literature review of psychological interventions for first responders. Work Stress. 2021;35(2):193–215. 123.	 WHO mhGAP Guideline Update. Geneva: World  Health Organization; 2015 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/204132, accessed 26 August 2022). 124.	 Nigatu YT, Huang J, Rao S, Gillis K, Merali Z, Wang J.  Indicated prevention interventions in the workplace for  depressive symptoms: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Am J Prev Med. 2019;56(1):e23–33. 125.	Stubbs B, Vancampfort D, Hallgren M, Firth J, Veronese  N, Solmi M et al. EPA guidance on physical activity as  a treatment for severe mental illness: a meta-review  of the evidence and position statement from the  European Psychiatric Association (EPA), supported by  the International Organization of Physical Therapists in  Mental Health (IOPTMH). Eur Psychiatry. 2018;54:124–44. 126.	 de Oliveira C, Cho E, Kavelaars R, Jamieson M, Bao  B, Rehm J. Economic analyses of mental health and  substance use interventions in the workplace: a systematic literature review and narrative synthesis. Lancet  Psychiatry. 2020;7(10):893–910. 127.	 Nieuwenhuijsen K, Verbeek JH, Neumeyer-Gromen A,  Verhoeven AC, Bültmann U, Faber B. Interventions to  improve return to work in depressed people. Cochrane  Database Syst Rev. 2020;(10):CD006237. 128.	 Arends I, Bruinvels D J, Rebergen D S, Nieuwenhuijsen  K, Madan I, Neumeyer‐Gromen A et al. Interventions to  facilitate return to work in adults with adjustment disorders. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;(12):CD006389. 129.	Sick on the Job? Myths and realities about mental health  and work. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; 2012 (https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/ docserver/[PHONE_REDACTED]enpdf?expires=[PHONE_REDACTED]&i d=id&accname=ocid195767&checksum=9A2DD9B929EF 6B5AA[PHONE_REDACTED]A113051E, accessed 26 August 2022). 130.	 da Silva Junior JS, Fischer FM. Disability due to mental  illness: social security benefits in Brazil 2008–2011. Rev  Saude Publica. 2014;186–90. 131.	 Corbière M, Mazaniello-Chézol M, Bastien M-F, Wathieu E,  Bouchard R, Panaccio A et al. Stakeholders’ role and actions in the return-to-work process of workers on sick-leave due  to common mental disorders: a scoping review. J Occup  Rehabil. 2020;30(3):381–419. 132.	 Rebergen D, Bruinvels D, Van Tulder M, Van der Beek A,  Van Mechelen W. Cost-effectiveness of guideline-based  care for workers with mental health problems. J Occup  Environ Med. 2009;313–22. 133.	 Lokman S, Volker D, Zijlstra-Vlasveld MC, Brouwers EP,  Boon B, Beekman AT et al. Return-to-work intervention  versus usual care for sick-listed employees: healtheconomic investment appraisal alongside a cluster  randomised trial. BMJ Open. 2017;7(10):e016348. 88 Guidelines on mental health at work

134.	Taimela S, Justen S, Aronen P, Sintonen H, Läärä E,  Malmivaara A et al. An occupational health intervention  programme for workers at high risk for sickness absence. Cost effectiveness analysis based on a randomised  controlled trial. Occup Environ Med. 2008;65(4):242–48. 135.	 Suijkerbuijk YB, Schaafsma FG, van Mechelen JC,  Ojajärvi A, Corbiere M, Anema JR. Interventions for  obtaining and maintaining employment in adults  with severe mental illness, a network meta‐analysis.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;(9):CD011867. 136.	 Kinoshita Y, Furukawa TA, Kinoshita K, Honyashiki M, Omori IM, Marshall M et al. Supported employment for adults  with severe mental illness. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.  2013;(9):CD008297. 137.	 van Rijn RM, Carlier BE, Schuring M, Burdorf A. Work  as treatment? The effectiveness of re-employment  programmes for unemployed persons with severe  mental health problems on health and quality of life: a  systematic review and meta-analysis. Occup Environ Med. 2016;73(4):275–9. 138.	 Fadyl JK, Anstiss D, Reed K, Khoronzhevych M, Levack  WM. Effectiveness of vocational interventions for  gaining paid work for people living with mild to  moderate mental health conditions: systematic review  and meta-analysis. BMJ Open. 2020;10(10):e039699. 139.	 Marshall RE, Milligan-Saville J, Petrie K, Bryant RA,  Mitchell PB, Harvey SB. Mental health screening  amongst police officers: factors associated with underreporting of symptoms. BMC Psychiatry. 2021;21(1):1–8. 140.	Technical and ethical guidelines for workers’ health  surveillance (OSH No. 72) Geneva: International Labour  Office; 1998 (https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/ public/---ed_protect/---protrav/---safework/documents/ normativeinstrument/wcms_177384.pdf, accessed 26  August 2022). 141.	 Occupational health services recommendation (No.  171). Geneva: International Labour Organization;  1985 (https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/ en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:55:0:::55:P55_TYPE,P55_ LANG,P55_DOCUMENT,P55_NODE:REC,en,R171,/ Document#:~:text=Occupational%20health%20 services%20should%20participate%20in%20the%20 training%20and%20regular,to%20occupational%20 safety%20and%20health, accessed 26 August 2022).  142.	 Screening programmes: a short guide. Increase  effectiveness, maximize benefits and minimize harm.  Copenhagen: World Health Organization Regional  Office for Europe; 2020 (https://apps.who.int/iris/ handle/10665/330829, accessed 26 August 2022).  143.	 Ethics in the office. Office Directive (Internal  Governance Documents System, No. 76). Geneva:  International Labour Organization; 2019 (https:// www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/-- -dcomm/---webdev/documents/genericdocument/ wcms_713105.pdf, accessed 26 August 2022).  144.	 Code of ethics and professional conduct. Geneva: World  Health Organization; 2020 (https://www.who.int/about/ ethics, accessed 22 May 2022). 145.	 Shea BJ, Reeves BC, Wells G, Thuku M, Hamel C, Moran  J et al. AMSTAR 2: a critical appraisal tool for systematic  reviews that include randomised or non-randomised  studies of healthcare interventions, or both. BMJ.  2017;358:j4008. 146.	 Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, Kunz R, Falck-Ytter Y,  Alonso-Coello P et al. GRADE: an emerging consensus  on rating quality of evidence and strength of  recommendations. BMJ. 2008;[PHONE_REDACTED]:924–6. 147.	 Hultcrantz M, Rind D, Akl EA, Treweek S, Mustafa RA,  Iorio A et al. The GRADE working group clarifies the  construct of certainty of evidence. J Clin Epidemiol.  2017;87:4–13. 148.	 Rehfuess EA, Stratil JM, Scheel IB, Portela A, Norris SL,  Baltussen R. The WHO-INTEGRATE evidence to decision  framework version 1.0: integrating WHO norms and  values and a complexity perspective. BMJ Glob Health.  2019;4(Suppl 1):e000844. 149.	 Alonso-Coello P, Schünemann HJ, Moberg J,  Brignardello-Petersen R, Akl EA, Davoli M et al. GRADE  Evidence to Decision (EtD) frameworks: a systematic  and transparent approach to making well informed  healthcare choices. 1 Introduction. BMJ. 2016:353:i[PHONE_REDACTED].	 Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, Falck-Ytter Y,  Vist GE, Liberati A et al. Going from evidence to  recommendations. BMJ. 2008;[PHONE_REDACTED]:1049–51.              89 References

90 Guidelines on mental health at work

Glossary © WHO / Malin Bring              [PHONE_REDACTED]Guidelines on mental health at work Informal sector All workers in unincorporated enterprises that produce at least partly for the market and are  not registered. Manager For the purposes of these guidelines, a manager is a worker who is responsible for supervising,  managing or leading another worker or workers - i.e. managers are employees who plan, direct,  coordinate and evaluate the overall activities of enterprises or of organizational units within them.23 Adverse effects  For the purposes of these guidelines, adverse effects are defined as outcomes of the key  questions and could include any untoward occurrence to a study participant caused by the  intervention of interest, such as drop-out.  Burnout Burnout is a syndrome conceptualized as resulting from chronic workplace stress that has  not been successfully managed. It has three dimensions: feelings of energy depletion or  exhaustion; increased mental distance from one’s job, or feelings of negativism or cynicism  related to one’s job; and reduced professional efficacy.21  Burnout may be a frequently used  idiom for distress in the workplace. Emotional distress This constitutes, for instance, sadness, anger, anxiety, irritability, or other negative emotional  states. People in emotional distress may or may not meet ICD criteria for a mental disorder. Evidence-todecision frameworks These are tabular displays of relevant considerations which are used to make a decision or to  formulate a recommendation.  Formal sector All workers in incorporated enterprises. GRADE The Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation is a system  for assessing the certainty of a body of evidence and for structuring considerations when  formulating recommendations on clinical or public health guidelines. GRADE evidence  profiles These are tabular displays of summary measures of effect and the GRADE certainty  assessments of the body of evidence for a specific question – usually defined by population,  intervention, comparator and outcome (PICO) format.  Help-seeking  behaviour For the purposes of these guidelines, help-seeking behaviour is defined as an outcome of the  key questions, which includes a person taking actions to seek or access support for a given  problem such as a mental health condition.  Informal  employment This includes employees (or persons not classified by status in employment) who are not  protected by national labour legislation in that job (i.e. not affiliated to a social security scheme  related to the job or not entitled to certain employment benefits); employers, members of  producers’ cooperatives and own account workers (only if what is produced is for sale) in a unit  of production that is considered informal; and contributing family workers.22 21 International Classification of Diseases 11th Revision. Geneva: World Health Organization (https://icd.who.int/en, accessed 25 May 2022). 22 Indicator description: informality. ILOSTAT. Geneva: International Labour Organization (Indicator description: Informality - ILOSTAT, accessed 25 May 2022). 23 International Standard Classification of Occupations 2008 (ISCO-08): structure, group definitions and correspondence tables. Geneva: International Labour Organization  (https://www.ilo.org/global/publications/ilo-bookstore/order-online/books/WCMS_172572/lang--en/index.htm, accessed 25 May 2022).

             93 Glossary Managerial,  leadership style and  communication For the purposes of these guidelines, managerial, leadership style and communication are  outcomes of the key questions which capture the manner of communication, consideration  of individual employees, justice in managerial behaviours, social support, provision of clarity,  supply of information and feedback, promotion of employee participation and control, or  leadership style (e.g. abusive, laissez-faire, authoritarian, participative). Mental disorder As defined by the ICD-11, mental disorders are syndromes characterized by clinically significant  disturbance in an individual’s cognition, emotional regulation, or behaviour that reflects a  dysfunction in the psychological, biological or developmental processes that underlie mental and  behavioural functioning. These disturbances are usually associated with distress or impairment  in personal, family, social, educational, occupational or other important areas of functioning. Mental health A state of mental well-being that enables people to cope with the stresses of life, to realize their  abilities, to learn well and work well, and to contribute to their communities. Mental health is an  integral component of health and well-being and is more than the absence of mental disorder. Mental health  conditions A broad term covering mental disorders and psychosocial disabilities. It also covers other  mental states associated with significant distress, impairment in functioning or risk of selfharm. It thus includes significant emotional distress. Mental health  knowledge and  attitudes, skills  For the purposes of these guidelines, mental health knowledge, attitudes and skills are outcomes  of the key questions. This term captures the key target variables of interventions to reduce stigma  through increasing literacy (knowledge) for mental health, changing stigmatizing attitudes, and  actions or behaviours which indicate the provision of appropriate support to others Positive mental  health  For the purposes of these guidelines, positive mental health is an outcome of the key questions.  It is intended to capture aspects of mental well-being, life satisfaction, positive self-concept,  self-esteem, self-control, self-efficacy resilience (in contrast to mental health conditions).  Psychosocial  disability Aligned with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, it is disability that  arises when someone with a long-term mental impairment interacts with various barriers  that may hinder the person’s full and effective participation in society on an equal basis with  others. Examples of such barriers are discrimination, stigma and exclusion. 24 England MJ, Butler AS, Gonzalez ML, editors. Psychosocial interventions for mental and substance use disorders: a framework for establishing evidence-based standards.  Washington (DC): National Academies Press; 2015. 25 Barbui C, Purgato M, Abdulmalik J, Acarturk C, Eaton J, Gastaldon C et al. Efficacy of psychosocial interventions for mental health outcomes in low-income and middle-income  countries: an umbrella review. Lancet Psychiatry. 2020;7(2):162–72. doi:10.1016/S[PHONE_REDACTED]. Psychosocial  interventions Psychosocial interventions involve interpersonal or informational activities, techniques or  strategies to improve health functioning and well-being.24 For mental health, these include  psychoeducation, stress management (including relaxation training and mindfulness), emotional  or practical social support (including psychological first aid), and various other social and  rehabilitative activities, including peer support and supported employment and housing.25  Psychosocial interventions are an umbrella category which includes psychological treatments  such as behavioural activation, problem-solving therapy, cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and  interpersonal therapy (IPT).

94 Guidelines on mental health at work Quality of life For the purposes of these guidelines, quality of life is an outcome of the key questions which  captures an individual’s perception of their position in life in the context of the culture and value  systems in which they live and in relation to their goals, expectations, standards and concerns. Functioning For the purposes of these guidelines, functioning is an outcome of the key questions which  describes the ability to conduct activities and to participate in life domains other than work  (e.g. cognition, communication, mobility, self-care, relationships, domestic life, community  and civic life activities, life participation). Satisfaction with  care For the purposes of these guidelines, satisfaction with care is an outcome of the key  questions and captures users’ and families’ satisfaction with care, such as their involvement  in the decision‐making process, quality of information provided, communication about the  condition, and care providers’ skills and competencies.  Substance use For the purposes of these guidelines, substance use is an outcome of the key questions,  capturing alcohol or illicit drug use measured as alcohol use, frequency of alcohol use, alcoholrelated problems, alcohol initiation, drunkenness initiation, binge drinking and alcohol misuse.  Drug use refers to the use of cannabis, opioids and/or stimulants/misuse of prescription drugs. Suicidal behaviours For the purposes of these guidelines, suicidal behaviours are an outcome of the key questions,  capturing self-harm (including suicide attempt), suicidal ideation and suicide mortality.  Worker For the purposes of these guidelines, a worker is any person above 18 years of age in paid work.  Workers (persons in employment) are usually defined as all those of working age who, during a short  reference period, were engaged in any activity to produce goods or provide services for pay or profit. Work-related  outcomes For the purposes of these guidelines, work-related outcomes are an outcome of the key  questions, capturing a broad range of variables which are indicative of a person’s functioning  at work, such as absenteeism (regular absence from work), presenteeism (being at, or present  at, or attending work when not fully functioning and thereby reduced efficiency is assumed),  productivity (effectiveness in work tasks), work engagement (perception of a fulfilling  connection to work), work ability (functional capacity and competence to participate in work),  absence, turnover, resignation, return to work, job retention, job satisfaction, job tenure or  length, employment status (employed part-time, full-time, unemployed). 

Annex 1  Contributors to the guidelines  The following persons contributed to the development of the guidelines. Their roles are summarized in Table 1.   1. The WHO Steering Group, composed of WHO departments relevant to the guideline topic, was formed to provide overall coordination and technical support during the guideline development process. Name Department  Faten Ben Abdelaziz Health Promotion Alex Butchart Social Determinants of Health Alarcos Cieza Management of Noncommunicable Diseases Ivan Ivanov Health, Environment and Climate Change Catherine Kane Health Workforce Hyo-Jeong Kim Emergencies Operations Aiysha Malik* Mental Health and Substance Use Mark van Ommeren** Mental Health and Substance Use Juana Willumsen Health Promotion (*) Responsible Technical Officer  (**) Chair              95 Annex 1 

2. The Guideline Development Group (GDG) included technical, academic, implementation and policy experts. Selection of GDG members took into account their relevant areas of expertise, sex and geographical representation. Name Affiliation WHO  Region Expertise Mirai Chatterjee Director, Self-Employed Women's  Association, India South-East  Asia Region Gender, inequality,  social protection, social  determinants of health,  informal economy Capucine de  Fouchiera Mental Health and Psychosocial  Support Specialist (Independent) European  Region Planning and delivery of  occupational mental health  services for humanitarian  workers Samuel Harvey Professor, Executive Director and  Chief Scientist, Black Dog Institute,  University of New South Wales,  Australia Western  Pacific Region Occupational psychiatry,  psychiatric epidemiology,  workplace mental health  research Hiroto Itob Professor, Department of Health Policy  and Management, Faculty of Medicine,  Tohoku Medical and Pharmaceutical  University, Japan  Western  Pacific Region Health policy and  management for occupational  mental health and safety Norito Kawakami Professor, Department of Mental  Health, Graduate School of Medicine,  The University of Tokyo, Japan Western  Pacific Region Occupational mental health,  community mental health,  epidemiology Spo Kgalamonoc Executive Director, National Institute  for Occupational Health, National  Health Laboratory Service, South  Africa African Region Occupational medicine,  implementation of  occupational health services  in LMICs Nour Kik Policy and Advocacy Coordinator,  National Mental Health Programme,  Ministry of Public Health, Lebanon Eastern  Mediterranean  Region Mental health policy,  implementation of national  workplace mental health  programme Margaret Kitt Deputy Director, National Institute for  Occupational Safety and Health, Centers  for Disease Control and Prevention,  USA; Director, WHO Collaborating  Centre for Occupational Health Region of the  Americas Occupational medicine,  psychosocial risks policy Anthony D.  LaMontagne Professor, Institute for Health  Transformation, School of Health  & Social Development, Deakin  University, Australia Western  Pacific Region Applied epidemiology,  workplace mental health,  occupational health and  safety interventions, policy  interventions for the  workplace evaluation Sapna Mahajand Director, Genomics and Society,  Genome Canada, Canada Region of the  Americas Development and  implementation of national,  regional and international  workplace mental health  standards, public health 96 Guidelines on mental health at work

Name Affiliation WHO  Region Expertise Seyed Kazem  Malakouti Professor, School of Behavioural  Sciences and Mental Health, Teheran  Institute of Psychiatry, Iran University  of Medical Sciences, Iran; Director, WHO  Collaborating Centre for Mental Health Eastern  Mediterranean  Region Integration of mental health  services in primary care,  suicide prevention, substance  use prevention Jose Luis AyusoMateos  Professor, Department of Psychiatry,  Medical School, Autonomous  University of Madrid, CIBERSAM,  Spain; Director, WHO Collaborating  Center for Research and Training in  Mental Health Services European  Region Epidemiology and  interventions for mental  disorders, chronic health  conditions and workplace  inclusion Karina Nielsen Professor, Institute of Work  Psychology, Sheffield University  Management School, The University of  Sheffield, UK European  Region Development, implementation  and evaluation of  organizational interventions  for mental wellbeing,  organizational psychology,  return to work Christopher Prinze Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, France European  Region Employment and disability  policy Pratap Sharan Professor, Department of Psychiatry, All  India Institute of Medical Sciences, India South-East  Asia Region Public mental health, health  worker mental health Katherine  Sorsdahl  Professor, Department of Psychiatry,  University of Cape Town, South Africa;  Co-Director, Alan J. Flisher Centre for  Public Mental Health African Region Global mental health, health  systems strengthening Graham  Thornicroft Professor Sir, Institute of Psychiatry,  Psychology & Neuroscience, King's  College London, UK; Director, WHO  Collaborating Centre for Research and  Training in Mental Health European  Region Stigma, community  psychiatry, global mental  health, guideline development a Affiliation from start of guideline development and during recommendations meeting: International Committee of the Red  Cross, Switzerland.  b Affiliation from start of guideline development and during recommendations meeting: Director, Research Center for  Overwork-Related Disorders, Japan Organization of Occupational Health and Safety, Japan c Participated in the GDG up to the recommendations meeting, at which time personal reasons prevented further  participation. d Affiliation from start of guideline development; prior to the recommendations meeting was with the Mental Health  Commission of Canada, Canada.   e Participated in the GDG up to the recommendations meeting. Requested to withdraw from GDG in May 2021, due to  personal circumstances.               97 Annex 1 

3. The External Review Group (ERG), composed of technical experts, employers and workers’  organizations, and representatives of people with lived experience of mental health conducted a peer review of the  draft guidelines to provide technical feedback, identify errors of fact, comment on clarity of language and provide  considerations related to implementation, adaptation and contextual issues. Selection of ERG members took into  account members’ relevant areas of expertise, sex and geographical representation. Name Affiliation WHO Region Atalay Alem Addis Ababa University, Ethiopia African Region Fabrice Althaus International Committee of the Red Cross, Switzerland European Region Lamia Bouzgarrou University of Monastir, Tunisia Eastern  Mediterranean  Region Marc Corbière University of Quebec in Montreal, Canada Region of the  Americas Premilla D’Cruz Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad, India South-East Asia  Region Carolyn Dewa  University of California- Davis, USA Region of the  Americas Frida Marina Fischer University of São Paulo, Brazil  Region of the  Americas Roshan Galvaan University of Cape Town, South Africa African Region Nick Glozier University of Sydney, Australia  Western Pacific  Region Neil Greenberg King’s College London, UK European Region Birgit Greiner University College Cork, Ireland European Region Nadine Harker South African Medical Research Council, South Africa African Region Ehimare Iden Occupational Health and Safety Managers, Nigeria African Region João Silvestre Silva-Junior  São Camilo University Center, Brazil Region of the  Americas Inah Kim Hanyang University College of Medicine, Republic of Korea Western Pacific  Region George Leveridge  Jamaica Constabulary Force, Jamaica Region of the  Americas 98 Guidelines on mental health at work

Name Affiliation WHO Region Shuang Li National Institute for Occupational Health and Poison  Control, China Western Pacific  Region Elizabeth Linos University of California- Berkeley, USA Region of the  Americas Ed Mantler Mental Health Commission of Canada Region of the  Americas Angela Martin University of Tasmania, Australia Western Pacific  Region Christina Maslach University of California- Berkeley, USA Region of the  Americas Álvaro Roberto Crespo  Merlo Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil Region of the  Americas María Elisa Ansoleaga  Moreno  Universidad Diego Portales, Chile Region of the  Americas Nina Hedegaard Nielsen Independent psychosocial risks expert, Denmark European Region Reiner Rugulies National Research Centre for the Working Environment,  Denmark European Region Godfrey Zari Rukundo Mbara University of Science and Technology, Uganda African Region Kamalesh Sarkar National Institute of Occupational Health, India South-East Asia  Region Vandad Sharifi Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Iran Eastern  Mediterranean  Region JianLi Wang Dalhousie University , Canada Region of the  Americas Mohammad Taghi Yasami Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Iran Eastern  Mediterranean  Region Dieter Zapf Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany European Region              99 Annex 1 

Organization and key stakeholder representatives Melissa Pitotti  Core Humanitarian Standard [CHS] Alliance Sarah Copsey European Agency for Safety and Health at Work [EU-OSHA] Julia Flintrop  Olga Kalina European Network of (Ex)Users and Survivors of Psychiatry [ENUSP] Guadalupe Morales Cano Claudia Sartor  Global Mental Health Peer Network [GMHPN] Madeline A, Naegle International Council of Nurses [ICN]* Pierre Vincensini International Organization of Employers [IOE] Rory O’Neill International Trade Union Confederation [ITUC] Victor Ugo Mentally Aware Nigeria Initiative [MANI] Miguel R. Jorge World Medical Association [WMA]* Rose Boucaut World Physiotherapy [WP]* Miguel R. Jorge Rose Boucaut Salam Alexis Gomez Jepkemoi Joanne Kibet Norma Elisa Gálvez Olvera Claudia Patricia Rojas Silva  *Health worker bodies who are members of the World Health Professionals Alliance (WHPA). 4. A guideline methodologist, Corrado Barbui, Professor of Psychiatry at the Department of Medicine and  Public Health, University of Verona, Italy (WHO Collaborating Centre for Research and Training in Mental Health and  Service Evaluation) was appointed. Consultants were also appointed to provide technical support to the evidence  teams in the development of their search strategy, development of evidence profiles, and in conducting the supporting  evidence work: Aemal Akhtar (Denmark), Gergö Baranyi (United Kingdom), Chiara Gastaldon (Italy), Georgia Michlig  (USA), Davide Papola (Italy).  100 Guidelines on mental health at work

5. Evidence review teams and supporting evidence teams were contracted by the WHO Steering Group to perform evidence reviews for specific key questions, develop GRADE evidence profiles, assess the certainty of the  body of evidence, draft evidence-to-decision tables; or were contracted for the supporting evidence work.  Name Affiliation Key questions: Organizational interventions (Questions 1, 2, 3) Hideaki Arima The University of Tokyo, Japan Yumi Asai Yui Hidaka Mako Iida Kotaro Imamura** Mai Iwanaga Yuka Kobayashi Yu Komase Natsu Sasaki Reiko Inoue Kitasato University School of Medicine, Japan Akizumi Tsutsumi ** Hisashi Eguchi University of Occupational and Environmental Health, Japan, Japan Ayako Hino Akiomi Inoue  Yasumasa Otsuka  University of Tsukuba, Japan Asuka Sakuraya  Tokyo Women’s Medical University, Japan Akihito Shimazu  Keio University, Japan Kanami Tsuno Kanagawa University of Human Services, Japan              101 Annex 1 

Name Affiliation Key questions: Manager and worker training interventions, screening programmes (Questions 4, 5, 6, 7, 13) Taylor Braund University of New South Wales, Australia Richard Bryant* Jasmine Choi-Christou Mark Deady Nadine Garland Aimee Gayed Sam Haffar Sophia Mobbs Katherine Petrie Jessica Strudwick Key questions: Individual interventions (Questions 8, 9, 10) Arpana Amarnath  Vrije University, WHO Collaborating Centre for Research and  Dissemination of Psychological Interventions, The Netherlands Pim Cuijpers* Eirini Karyotaki Clara Miguel Key questions: Return to work and gaining employment (Questions 11, 12) Liam O’Mara Columbia University, WHO Collaborating Centre for Capacity Building and  Training in Global Mental Health, USA Kathleen Pike* Adam Rosenfeld Hikari Shumsky 102 Guidelines on mental health at work

Name Affiliation Supporting evidence: Implementation review Rachel Lewis Affinity Health at Work, United Kingdom Alice Sinclair Jo Yarker* Fehmidah Munir Supporting evidence: Values and preferences survey Promit Ananyo Chakraborty University of British Columbia, Canada Vanessa Evans Raymond Lam Jill Murphy** Andrew Greenshaw** University of Alberta, Canada Jasmine Noble Supporting evidence: Informal sector review Georgia Michlig* Johns Hopkins University, USA *Lead ** Co-Leads 6. Technical advisors were staff members of the International Labour Organization (ILO) led by Manal Azzi, Team Lead on Occupational Safety and Health, ILO Headquarters, Geneva, Switzerland. The ILO is a tripartite United Nations  agency which includes governments, employers’ organizations and workers’ organizations of its 187 Member States. The  international bodies of the workers (International Trade Union Confederation) and employers (International Organisation of Employers) organizations were key stakeholders in the guidelines and were engaged in aspects of the guideline  development, such as review of the values and preferences survey, and the review by the External Review Group.               103 Annex 1 

7. Funders: The Wellcome Trust, an independent global charitable foundation with a focus on science and health,  provided funding to the WHO Department of Mental Health and Substance Use for the development of the guidelines.  A representative of the funder attended the recommendations meeting as an observer. Observers are not permitted to  participate in the meeting to develop recommendations.  Table 1. Guideline contributors’ role during the development process.  Guideline  process WHO SG GDG  ERG Methodologist Evidence  teams Technical  advisors  Identifying  guideline  contributors  Advised on  members of  the ERG    Advised on  members of  the GDG/ ERG Deciding scope,  key questions and  outcomes Technical  support &  coordination   Technical support  to WHO SG   Identifying,  appraising and  synthesizing  evidence Technical  support  &  coordination Technical  advice on  search  strategy  Technical support  to evidence teams   Supporting  evidence Technical  support &  coordination Members  of the GDG  advised on  imp review  and survey  design Selected  members  of the ERG  advised  on survey  design Technical support  to integrate  findings  Technical  advice on  design of  survey Developing  recommendations Technical  support &  coordination   Technical support  to GDG and WHO  SG Technical  support to  GDG   Invited to  provide  technical  advice during  selected  discussions Drafting the  guidelines       Peer review       Approval from  WHO GRC  NA NA NA NA NA Publishing and  disseminating  NA NA NA NA NA Abbreviations: NA, not applicable, WHO SG, WHO Steering Group. GRC, WHO Guidelines Review Committee   104 Guidelines on mental health at work

The WHO Steering Group followed the current WHO Compliance, Risk Management and Ethics (CRE) policy. Prospective  members of the GDG, ERG and evidence team were asked to complete the WHO Declaration of Interests (DOI) form and  to provide their curriculum vitae. These documents, along with additional information (obtained through the Internet  and bibliographic database searches), were reviewed by the WHO Secretariat to identify conflicts of interest related to the  guideline topic.  Additionally, the names and brief biographies of potential GDG members were published on the WHO website for more  than two weeks, together with a description of the objective of the meeting, for public review and comment. No concerns  were received. Interests were assessed as insignificant or minimal if they were considered unlikely to affect, or unlikely to reasonably be  perceived to affect, the individual’s judgement when assessing evidence or formulating recommendations. If an interest was  deemed to be potentially significant, the following management options were considered: 1) limited participation of the  individual in the guideline development process; and 2) full exclusion from the process. At the beginning of the guideline meetings, the declaration of interests of each GDG member was presented. GDG members  and evidence teams attending the meetings were asked to provide updates if their declarations of interests had changed.  Where changes had occurred, the WHO Steering Group considered the management options as noted above. The GDG, ERG,  evidence teams and meeting observers were required to sign a confidentiality agreement. ILO staff are subject to declarations of interest and conflict of interest management according to the policies of the ILO  (Office Directive on Ethics in the Office (143) and, in the same way as WHO staff, are subject to the Standards of Conduct for  the International Civil Service. WHO staff are also subject to WHO’s Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct (144). Meeting  observers and organization representatives were not required to complete a declaration of interests because they did not  actively participate in the guideline development discussions.  All contributors declared no interests, with the exception of those listed below. A summary of declared interests and how  they were managed is provided:  Annex 2  Managing declarations of  interest and conflicts of interest              105 Annex 2 

Name Declaration of Interest Conflict of interest and management GDG Members Capucine de Fouchier Change of employment No conflict of interest identified Samuel Harvey Participation in evidence reviews  for key questions (4, 5, 6, 7, 13) Significant conflict of interest identified. A  conditional participation management plan  was initiated. Professor Harvey participated as a  member of evidence review team on discussions  about the PICOs, and not as a member of the GDG;  therefore he had no vocal rights or voting right for  recommendations 4, 5, 6, 7 and 13 Norito Kawakami Research funds, paid  consultancies and lecture  honoraria; President of the Japan  Society for Occupational Health  (unpaid); travel support to attend  non-guideline WHO meeting No conflict of interest identified Anthony D. LaMontagne Employment, research funds, paid  consultancies, lecture honoraria No conflict of interest identified Sapna Mahajan Unpaid consultancy; lecture  honoraria; change of employment  No conflict of interest identified Jose Luis Ayuso-Mateos  Research funds No conflict of interest identified Karina Nielsen Employment and research funds No conflict of interest identified Graham Thornicroft Unpaid consultancy; board  trustee and chair of key  stakeholder organizations  (nonprofit) No conflict of interest identified 106 Guidelines on mental health at work

Name Declaration of Interest Conflict of interest and management ERG members Fabrice Althaus Employment No conflict of interest identified Lamia Bouzgarrou  Paid consultancy and travel costs  by WHO (unrelated to guidelines) No conflict of interest identified Marc Corbière Research funds, travel costs  by institution, chair of key  stakeholder group No conflict of interest identified Carolyn Dewa Paid consultancy No conflict of interest identified Nick Glozier  Research funds, paid  consultancies, IP in workplace  focused interventions & training. No conflict of interest identified Neil Greenberg Paid director of company in topic  of guideline; trustee and lead in  key stakeholder groups (not for  profit) No conflict of interest identified Birgit Greiner  Employment, research funds and  paid consultancy No conflict of interest identified Nadine Harker Unpaid consultancy No conflict of interest identified João Silvestre SilvaJunior Research funds No conflict of interest identified Angela Martin  Employment, paid director of  private company in topic of  guideline No conflict of interest identified Christina Maslach  IP for measurement tool on  burnout  No conflict of interest identified Nina Hedegaard Nielsen  Employment No conflict of interest identified Reiner Rugulies Employment, research funds No conflict of interest identified Dieter Zapf  Employment, paid consultancies No conflict of interest identified              107 Annex 2 

Name Declaration of Interest Conflict of interest and management Evidence and supporting evidence teams Taylor Braund Employment No conflict of interest identified Mark Deady Research funds No conflict of interest identified Raymond Lam Research funds, paid  consultancies, lecture honoraria,  copyright holder for mental  health measurement tool, unpaid  executive director, unpaid board  of directors for key stakeholder  organizations (not for profit) No conflict of interest identified Akihito Shimazu  Paid consultancies No conflict of interest identified Jo Yarker Employment and paid  consultancy No conflict of interest identified 108 Guidelines on mental health at work

Prior to the development of the guidelines, an initial meeting – the Landscape Forum on Workplace Mental Health was  held in Geneva, Switzerland in November 2019. One key objective was to discuss the extent of evidence for interventions  addressing mental health at work. Following this meeting, the WHO Steering Group performed preliminary scoping of the  available evidence in preparation for a draft scope for the guidelines. With the support of the Steering Group and guideline  methodologist, the scope was reviewed by the GDG at its first meeting, held virtually in April 2020, which discussed  and agreed on the final scope and PICO (population, intervention, comparison, outcome) questions of the guidelines.  Background questions were additionally devised in order to scope the best available evidence sources and to provide  relevant contextual information for the prospective main body of the guidelines and for prospective evidence-to-decision  considerations – in particular, 1) risk factors at work and their impact on mental health outcomes; and 2) the prevalence of  mental health outcomes in general working populations and specific subpopulations (such as those identified as minority  groups and humanitarian and health workers).  Members of the WHO Steering Group, in consultation with the GDG and the methodologist, developed a list of outcomes that  were most relevant to specific PICO questions. The GDG then rated each outcome on a scale from 1 to 9 and indicated whether  it considered each outcome critical (rated 7–9), important (rated 4–6) or not important (rated 1–3) for decision-making.  The final key questions are provided in the following table which includes the critical and important outcomes. Definitions  of terms can be found in the glossary. The details of the PICO format for each key question are provided in the relevant  section of the web Annex: Evidence profiles.  Annex 3  Developing the scope, key  questions and outcomes              109 Annex 3 

QUESTION 1. What universally-delivered organizational interventions improve positive mental  health and reduce symptoms of mental health conditions, suicidal behaviours and substance use? OUTCOMES:  Critical outcomes are: mental health symptoms and disorders; positive mental health; quality of life and functioning;  work-related outcomes. Important outcomes are: adverse effects; substance use; suicidal behaviours. QUESTION 2. What organizational interventions delivered to civilian health workers,  emergency workers, humanitarian workers, improve positive mental health and reduce  symptoms of mental health conditions, suicidal behaviours, substance use? OUTCOMES:  Critical outcomes are: MH symptoms and disorders; Positive MH; Quality of life and Functioning; Substance use;  Suicidal behaviours; Work-related outcomes; Important outcomes are: Adverse effects QUESTION 3. What organizational interventions delivered to workers with symptoms of  emotional distress or meeting criteria for mental health conditions improve positive mental  health and reduce symptoms of mental health conditions, suicidal behaviours and substance use? OUTCOMES:  Critical outcomes are: mental health symptoms and disorders; quality of life and functioning; substance use; suicidal  behaviours; work-related outcomes. Important outcomes are: adverse effects; positive mental health. QUESTION 4. What training for managers (a) improves knowledge, attitudes and skills/ behaviours to support the mental health and well-being of workers and/or (b) improves their  workers’ positive mental health and reduces symptoms of mental health conditions, suicidal  behaviours and substance use? OUTCOMES:  Critical outcomes are: help-seeking behaviour (supervisees); managerial leadership style and communication  (managers); mental health knowledge, attitudes and skills (managers); mental health symptoms and disorders  (supervisees); positive mental health (supervisees); work-related outcomes (supervisees). Important outcomes are: adverse effects (managers); substance use (supervisees); suicidal behaviours (supervisees);  quality of life and functioning (supervisees). 110 Guidelines on mental health at work

QUESTION 5. What training for managers of civilian health, emergency and humanitarian  workers (a) improves knowledge, attitudes and skills/behaviours to support the mental health  and well-being of workers and/or (b) improves their workers’ positive mental health and reduces  symptoms of mental health conditions, suicidal behaviours and substance use? OUTCOMES:  Critical outcomes are: help-seeking behaviour (supervisees); managerial leadership style and communication  (managers); mental health knowledge, attitudes and skills (managers); mental health symptoms and disorders  (supervisees); positive mental health (supervisees); work-related outcomes (supervisees). Important outcomes are: adverse effects (managers); substance use (supervisees); suicidal behaviours (supervisees);  quality of life and functioning (supervisees). QUESTION 6. What training for workers (a) improves knowledge, attitudes and skills/behaviours  to support the mental health and well-being of workers and/or (b) improves their colleagues’  positive mental health and reduces symptoms of mental health conditions, suicidal behaviours  and substance use? OUTCOMES:  Critical outcomes are: help-seeking behaviour (colleagues); mental health knowledge, attitudes, skills (workers); mental  health symptoms and disorders (colleagues); positive mental health (colleagues); work-related outcomes (colleagues). Important outcomes are: adverse effects (workers, colleagues); substance use (colleagues); suicidal behaviours  (colleagues); quality of life and functioning (colleagues). QUESTION 7. What training for civilian health, emergency and humanitarian workers (a)  improves knowledge, attitudes and skills/behaviours to support the mental health and wellbeing of workers and/or (b) improves colleagues’ positive mental health and reduces symptoms  of mental health conditions, suicidal behaviours and substance use? OUTCOMES:  Critical outcomes are: help-seeking behaviour (colleagues); mental health knowledge, attitudes and skills (workers); mental  health symptoms and disorders (colleagues); positive mental health (colleagues); work-related outcomes (colleagues). Important outcomes are: adverse effects (workers, colleagues); substance use (colleagues); suicidal behaviours (colleagues);  quality of life and functioning (colleagues). QUESTION 8. What universally-delivered individual interventions (1A - psychosocial and/or 1B  - physical activity and/or 1C - health promotion [lifestyle] interventions) improve positive mental  health, and reduce symptoms of mental health conditions, suicidal behaviours and substance use? OUTCOMES:  Critical outcomes are: mental health symptoms and disorders; positive mental health; quality of life and functioning;  work-related outcomes. Important outcomes are: adverse effects; substance use; suicidal behaviours.              111 Annex 3 

QUESTION 9. What individual interventions (1A - psychosocial and/or 1B - physical activity and/ or 1C - health promotion [lifestyle] interventions) delivered to civilian health, emergency and  humanitarian workers improve positive mental health and reduce symptoms of mental health  conditions, suicidal behaviours and substance use? OUTCOMES:  Critical outcomes are: mental health symptoms and disorders; positive mental health; quality of life and functioning;  substance use; suicidal behaviours; work-related outcomes. Important outcomes are: adverse effects. QUESTION 10. What individual interventions (1A - psychosocial and/or 1B - physical activity  and/or 1C - health promotion [lifestyle] interventions) delivered to workers with symptoms of  emotional distress or meeting criteria for mental health conditions improve positive mental  health and reduce symptoms of mental health conditions, suicidal behaviours and substance use? OUTCOMES:  Critical outcomes are: mental health symptoms and disorders; positive mental health; quality of life and functioning;  substance use; suicidal behaviours; work-related outcomes. Important outcomes are: adverse effects. QUESTION 11. For people on absence due to mental health conditions, what interventions improve  (a) return to work, (b) absence and (c) positive mental health and reduce mental health symptoms? OUTCOMES:  Critical outcomes are: mental health symptoms and disorders; quality of life and functioning; substance use; suicidal  behaviours; work-related outcomes. Important outcomes are: adverse effects; positive mental health. QUESTION 12. For people with a mental health condition, are recovery-oriented strategies  enhancing vocational and economic inclusion (such as supported employment) feasible and  effective?26 OUTCOMES:  Critical outcomes are: mental health symptoms and disorders; quality of life and functioning; work-related outcomes. Important outcomes are: adverse effects; positive mental health; satisfaction with care. QUESTION 13. Are screening programmes for mental health conditions at work acceptable and  do they reduce symptoms of mental health conditions in workers? OUTCOMES:  Critical outcomes are: mental health symptoms and disorders; user satisfaction; work-related outcomes. Important outcomes are: adverse effects; positive mental health; quality of life and functioning. 26 Update of the Mental Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP) guideline for mental, neurological and substance use disorders, 2015. Key question. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2015. 112 Guidelines on mental health at work

Annex 4  Reviewing the evidence  and supporting evidence Evidence reviews for key questions Details of the selection process, search strategies, included reviews and primary studies for each PICO question are  presented in web Annex. The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, PubMed, EMBASE, PsycINFO and Global Index Medicus were searched to  identify existing systematic reviews that answered the key questions. On the advice of GDG members, the methodologist  and expert members of the evidence teams, where suitable reviews for specific outcomes were not available within the  past 5 years, the time frame was extended to a maximum of 10 years. The reviews that were identified were then evaluated  according to the following criteria: ▶ their methodology as appraised by the AMSTAR II (Assessing the Methodological Quality of Systematic Reviews tool  (Shea et al. (145)); ▶ how directly they matched the PICO questions; ▶ whether they reported sufficient information to allow for an assessment of the certainty of the evidence (e.g. tables  with characteristics of included studies, risk-of-bias assessments at the study level, results of meta analyses in forest  plots); ▶ the date of the most recent review to ensure that the most up-to-date evidence was used. The evidence teams prioritized the most recent and highest-quality (based on AMSTAR II ratings) reviews for each question  in relation to the population, intervention, comparison and outcomes. As many reviews as necessary were included to  address each question. A search strategy was developed in collaboration with the methodologist and evidence teams  to harmonize common search terms and strategy across the reviews. Reviews which included randomized designs were  prioritized in all key questions; however, controlled observational designs were also considered because of existing  knowledge on the common design of research in occupational settings/populations.  For two key questions (4 and 5) an update of an existing review was pursued in order to capture additional studies to better  answer the specific PICO questions. Question 13 was not addressed in an existing systematic review, and a systematic review  of primary studies was conducted. The evidence team, in consultation with the methodologist and the WHO Steering Group,  devised a new search strategy to identify relevant primary studies (web Annex). A total of 36 systematic reviews and nine  additional primary studies were included. The systematic review team also identified one network meta-analysis.               113 Annex 4 

Supporting evidence to supplement evidence-to-decision  considerations In light of global changes in the modes of working as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the WHO Steering Group and  GDG considered areas of importance to supplement the evidence reviews, namely: the values and preferences of key  stakeholders and the implementation barriers and facilitators. Additionally, in light of the dearth of literature reported by  the evidence teams in relation to the informal sector, a third piece of supplementary evidence was commissioned. Full  reports of all three can be found in web Annex.  A mixed-methods survey was commissioned to capture current values and preferences of key stakeholders – workers,  employers, providers of mental health/occupational health services, including union representatives – in relation to the  outcomes and interventions in the guidelines scope. Key data from the survey were included in the evidence-to-decision  considerations.   A semi-structured interview with experts and providers of care for the informal sector was conducted in order to  identify the needs and potential avenues of work and mental health service delivery for this population.  A review of qualitative research was commissioned on the barriers to, and facilitators of, implementing interventions that  support workplace mental health. GRADE CerQual (Confidence in the Evidence from Reviews of Qualitative research)27 was  used to assess confidence in the findings of qualitative evidence.  Certainty of evidence  After identifying the best available evidence to answer each key question, another step was taken to determine the certainty  of this evidence – in other words, how confident could the GDG be that the evidence (estimate of effect) supported the  making of any recommendations on the basis of that evidence. The GRADE system was used to assess the certainty of the  body of quantitative evidence (from the evidence reviews) for each critical and important outcome (146). 27 See: https://www.cerqual.org/, accessed 29 May 2022. 114 Guidelines on mental health at work

The evidence teams, supported by the methodologist, developed evidence profiles to summarize relative and absolute  estimates of effects and an assessment of the certainty of the evidence. The certainty of evidence for each question and each  outcome was rated as “high”, “moderate”, “low” or “very low” on the basis of established criteria, namely: 	 ▶ study design (e.g. randomized designs increase certainty, observational designs reduce certainty); 	 ▶ risk of bias (e.g. problems with how the studies were designed or conducted reduce certainty); 	 ▶ inconsistency (e.g. if the studies in the review are very different in their results, this reduces certainty);	 ▶ indirectness (e.g. if the studies are not specific to the key PICO question (for instance, the population is slightly  different) this reduces certainty); 	 ▶ imprecision (if there is a smaller number of participants in the studies, or the confidence intervals [CI] are wide, this  reduces certainty); and 	 ▶ publication bias (e.g. if there are factors that would have unfairly enhanced the likelihood of these studies being  published, this reduces certainty) (147).  These assessments were presented to the GDG in GRADE evidence profiles for discussion and formulation of  recommendations. Evidence profiles for each key question are shown in web Annex. Certainty Interpretation High We are very confident that the true effect lies close to the estimate. Further research is  unlikely to change confidence in the estimate of effect.  Moderate We are moderately confident in the estimate of effect. The true effect is likely to be  close to the estimate of effect, but there is a possibility that it is substantially different.  Further research is likely to have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of  effect and may change the estimate. Low Our confidence in the estimate of effect is limited. The true effect may be substantially  different from the estimate of effect. Further research is very likely to have an  important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and is very likely to change  the estimate. Very low We have very little confidence in the estimate of effect.               115 Annex 4 

Annex 5  Developing the recommendations The GDG met virtually for six duplicate sessions in June 2021. Graham Thornicroft and Jose Luis Ayuso-Mateos were chairs  of the meetings, which were held in duplicate sessions to accommodate the differences in time zones of GDG members.  Corrado Barbui, the methodologist, was selected as vice-chair due to anticipated absences of the two chairs.  Evidence reviews, supplementary evidence and GRADE tables were shared in advance with GDG members and were  presented throughout the meetings. Formulation of the recommendations and their strength ratings were facilitated by the  chairs and supported by the methodologist. The GDG benefited from a structured evidence-to-decision (EtD) framework which was developed by the evidence teams,  with support from the WHO Steering Group and the methodologist, to guide the development of recommendations. The  information which contributed to the EtD framework was informed by the systematic reviews, supplementary evidence, and  the expertise of the GDG.  The EtD factors were: the priority of the problem, certainty of the evidence, balance of desirable and undesirable effects,  values, resources required, certainty in the resources required, cost-effectiveness, feasibility, health, equity, equality and  non-discrimination, human rights and sociocultural acceptability. The latter two factors were adapted from the WHO  INTEGRATE EtD (148), replacing the items of equity and acceptability in the GRADE DECIDE EtD (149). Each recommendation could be for or against a specific intervention, and either strong or conditional (150).  ▶ A strong recommendation means the GDG was confident that the desirable effects of adherence to a recommendation  outweighed the undesirable effects.  ▶ A conditional recommendation means that the GDG concluded that the desirable effects of adherence to a  recommendation probably outweighed the undesirable effects.  WHO’s guideline recommendations are developed through a process that aims to achieve consensus among the GDG members.  Consensus was defined as a two-thirds majority vote. The GDG thus discussed and agreed on the recommendations, including the  wording and direction (for or against the intervention) by consensus. The strength of each recommendation (strong or conditional)  was agreed on by voting. Because meetings were held each day in duplicate, the progress of the first group of GDG members  on a given discussion was then presented to the second group for further discussion and refinement. If the second group had  major substantive disagreements with the recommendation, its revision was then presented to the first group in a final meeting.  Had there been major disagreement by the end of the final scheduled meeting, there was an agreement to reconvene the GDG if  needed. This was not the case.  116 Guidelines on mental health at work

Annex 6  Drafting the guidelines  and external review   Following the formulation of the recommendations by the GDG, the Responsible Technical Officer drafted the guidelines for  review by the GDG and ERG. The role of the peer review was not to change the recommendations agreed by the GDG; however,  if the peer reviewers had identified major concerns, these would have been brought back to the GDG for consideration. This  situation did not occur.  The WHO Steering Group reviewed all peer review comments and, following discussion, revised the guidelines for clarity  while making sure that the recommendations remained consistent with the original meaning as formulated by the GDG. WHO has an internal approval and quality assurance process to ensure that all WHO publications, including guidelines, meet  the highest international standards for quality, reporting and presentation. These guidelines were reviewed and approved  by the WHO Guidelines Review Committee (GRC). Finally, the guidelines were prepared for publication and dissemination.              117 Annex 6 

Contact World Health Organization Mental Health and Substance Use Avenue Appia [PHONE_REDACTED]Geneva 27 Switzerland mailto:[EMAIL_REDACTED] www.who.int/teams/mental-health-and-substance-use