[PHONE_REDACTED]Human rights focus Evidence-based  practice Life course  approach Multisectoral  approach Empowerment of persons at risk Universal health  coverage People with mental disorders should be  able to access, without the risk of  impoverishing themselves, essential  health and social services that enable  them to achieve recovery and the  highest attainable standard of health. Mental health strategies, actions and  interventions must be compliant with the  Convention on the Rights of Persons with  Disabilities and other human rights  instruments. Mental health strategies and  interventions need to be based on  scientiﬁc evidence and/or best practice,  taking cultural considerations into  account. A comprehensive and coordinated  response for mental health requires  partnership with multiple public sectors  as well as the private sector. Policies, plans and services for mental  health need to account for health and  social needs at all stages of the life  course. People with mental disorders and  psychosocial disabilities should be  empowered and involved in mental  health advocacy, policy, planning,  legislation, service provision, monitoring,  research and evaluation. KEY PRINCIPLES CORE OBJECTIVES Strengthen   eﬀective leadership  and governance  Provide comprehensive,  integrated and  responsive mental health  and social care in  community-based  settings Strengthen information  systems, evidence and  research Implement strategies  for promotion and  prevention 1. 2. 3. 4.

80% of countries will have developed or  updated their policy or plan for mental  health in line with international and  regional human rights instruments. 80% of countries will have developed or  updated their law for mental health in line  with international and regional human  rights instruments. Service coverage for mental health conditions  will have increased by at least half. 80% of countries will have doubled number of  community-based mental health facilities. 80% of countries will have integrated mental  health into primary health care. 80% of countries will have at least two  functioning national, multisectoral mental  health promotion and prevention  programmes. The rate of suicide will be reduced by  one-third. 80% of countries will have a system in  place for mental health and psychosocial  preparedness for emergencies and/or  disasters. 80% of countries will be routinely collecting  and reporting at least a core set of mental  health indicators every two years through  their national health and social information  systems. The output of global research on mental  health will have doubled. UPDATED MENTAL HEALTH TARGETS  Existence of a national policy or plan for mental health and  a national law covering mental health that is being  implemented and in line with international human rights  instruments. ACTION PLAN INDICATORS Comprehensive, integrated services  in community-based settings Eﬀective leadership and  governance  Strategies for promotion  and prevention Information systems, evidence and  research 1. 2. 3. 4. National mental health  law & policy Service uptake Proportion of persons with psychosis or  depression who have used services over  the past 12 months.  Number of community-based mental health facilities. Existence of a system in place for integration of mental  health into primary health care. Community-based  mental health services Research Number of published articles  on mental health research. Information  systems  Core set of identiﬁed and agreed mental  health indicators routinely collected and  reported every two years. Promotion and  prevention Functioning programmes of multisectoral  mental health promotion and prevention  in existence. Suicide  prevention Suicide mortality rate  (per [PHONE_REDACTED]population). Existence of a system in place for mental health and  psychosocial preparedness for emergencies/disasters. Mental health during  emergencies/disasters TRACKING PROGRESS 2030

FOR MEMBER STATES Ensure that people with mental disorders and psychosocial disabilities are given a formal role and authority to inﬂuence the  process of designing, planning and implementing policies, laws and services. Work with national emergency committees and mental health providers in order to include mental health and psychosocial  support needs in emergency preparedness and enable access to safe and supportive services, including services that  address psychological trauma and promote recovery and resilience, for persons with mental disorders (pre-existing as well  as emergency-induced) or psychosocial problems, including services for health and humanitarian workers, during and  following emergencies, with due attention to the longer-term funding required to build or rebuild a community-based  mental health system after the emergency. Lead and coordinate a multisectoral strategy that combines universal and targeted interventions for: promoting mental  health and preventing mental disorders; reducing stigmatization, discrimination and human rights violations; and which is  responsive to speciﬁc vulnerable groups across the lifespan and integrated within the national mental health and health  promotion strategies. Integrate mental health into the routine health information system and identify, collate, routinely report and use core mental  health data disaggregated by sex and age (including data on completed and attempted suicides) in order to improve mental  health service delivery, promotion and prevention strategies and to provide data for the Global Mental Health Observatory (as  a part of WHO’s Global Health Observatory). Policy and law Develop, strengthen, keep up-to-date and implement national policies, strategies, programmes, laws and regulations relating  to mental health within all relevant sectors, including codes of practice and mechanisms to monitor protection of human rights  and implementation of legislation, in line with evidence, best practice, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities  and other international and regional human rights instruments. Resource planning Plan according to measured need and allocate a budget across all relevant sectors that is commensurate with identiﬁed  human and other resources required to implement agreed-upon evidence-based mental health plans and actions. Stakeholder collaboration  Motivate and engage stakeholders from all relevant sectors, including persons with mental disorders, carers and family  members, in the development and implementation of policies, laws and services relating to mental health, through a  formalized structure and/or mechanism. Strengthening & empowerment of people with mental disorders  & psychosocial disabilities  Eﬀective leadership and governance  Service reorganization & expanded coverage Systematically shift the locus of care away from long-stay mental hospitals towards non-specialized health settings with  increasing coverage of evidence-based interventions for priority conditions and using a network of linked community-based  mental health services, including short-stay inpatient care, and outpatient care in general hospitals, primary care,  comprehensive mental health centres, day care centres, support of people with mental disorders living with their families,  and supported housing. Integrated and responsive care Integrate and coordinate holistic prevention, promotion, rehabilitation, care and support that aims at meeting both mental  and physical health care needs and facilitates the recovery of persons of all ages with mental disorders within and across  general health and social services (including the promotion of the right to employment, housing, and education) through  service user-driven treatment and recovery plans and, where appropriate, with the inputs of families and carers. Mental health in humanitarian emergencies Resource planning Build the knowledge and skills of general and specialized health workers to deliver evidence-based, culturally-appropriate  and human rights-oriented mental health and social care services, for children and adolescents, inter alia, by introducing  mental health into undergraduate and graduate curricula; and through training and mentoring health workers in the ﬁeld,  particularly in non-specialized settings, in order to identify people with mental disorders and oﬀer appropriate treatment and  support as well as to refer people, as appropriate, to other levels of care. Address disparities Proactively identify and provide appropriate support for groups at particular risk of mental illness who have poor access to  services. Strategies for promotion and prevention Information systems, evidence and research Improve research capacity and academic collaboration on national priorities for research in mental health, particularly  operational research with direct relevance to service development and implementation and the exercise of human rights by  persons with mental disorders, including the establishment of centres of excellence with clear standards, with the inputs of all  relevant stakeholders including persons with mental disorders and psychosocial disabilities. Evidence and research Information systems Suicide prevention Develop and implement comprehensive national strategies for the prevention of suicide, with special attention to groups  identiﬁed as at increased risk of suicide, including lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons, youth and other vulnerable  groups of all ages based on local context. Mental health promotion and prevention 1. 2. 3. 4. Comprehensive, integrated services in  community-based settings